The Project Gutenberg eBook of Memoirs of the life, exile, and conversations of the Emperor Napoleon. (Vol. I)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Memoirs of the life, exile, and conversations of the Emperor Napoleon. (Vol. I)

Author: comte de Emmanuel-Auguste-Dieudonné Las Cases


        
Release date: January 16, 2017 [eBook #53967]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53967

Credits: Produced by KD Weeks, Josep Cols Canals and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE, EXILE, AND CONVERSATIONS OF THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON. (VOL. I) ***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_.

Footnotes have been moved to follow the paragraphs in which they are
referenced.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

This is the first of four volumes, which can be found at Project
Gutenberg here:

   Volume I        https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53967
   Volume II       https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53968
   Volume III      https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53969
   Volume IV       https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53970

[Illustration:

  _David._ _Cooper._
  NAPOLEON.
  _Published for Henry Colburn, Nov.^r 17, 1835._
]




                                MEMOIRS
                                   OF
                            THE LIFE, EXILE,
                                  AND
                             CONVERSATIONS,
                                 OF THE
                           EMPEROR NAPOLEON.

                                   BY

                        THE COUNT DE LAS CASES.


                             A NEW EDITION.


                             WITH PORTRAITS

                   AND NUMEROUS OTHER EMBELLISHMENTS.


                                VOL. I.

                                LONDON:
                      PUBLISHED FOR HENRY COLBURN,
 BY RICHARD BENTLEY; BELL AND BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH; J. CUMMING, DUBLIN;
                          AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.

                                -------

                              MDCCCXXXVI.




                                ANDOVER:

                 STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY B BENSLEY.




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                -------

                                VOLUME I.
                                                                   PAGE.
 Portrait of the Emperor Napoleon, _to face the title_.
 Napoleon on board the Bellerophon                                    26
 Portrait of Charles Bonaparte                                        66
 Portrait of Letizia Bonaparte                                        69
 Residence of the Emperor at Longwood                                264

                                -------

                               VOLUME II.

 Portrait of the Empress Josephine, _to face the title_.
 Portrait of Marshal Bertrand                                         33
 Map of Saint Helena                                                  39
 Portrait of Prince Talleyrand                                        64
 Eugene Beauharnois claiming his Father’s Sword                      186

                                -------

                               VOLUME III.

 Portrait of Sir Hudson Lowe, _to face the title_.
 Ground Plan of Longwood                                              21
 The House in which Napoleon was Born                                113
 The Burning of Moscow                                               164
 Napoleon’s Return from Elba                                         302

                                -------

                               VOLUME IV.

 Portrait of Count De Las Cases, _to face the title_.
 Napoleon at Saint Helena                                            149
 Death of Napoleon                                                   386
 Statue of Napoleon on the Place Vendome                             388
 Tomb of Napoleon                                                    399




                                PREFACE.


Circumstances the most extraordinary have long kept me near the most
extraordinary man that ever existed. Admiration made me follow him,
without knowing him, and when I did know him, love alone would have
fixed me for ever near his person. The world is full of his glory, his
deeds, and his monuments; but no one knows the true shades of his
character, his private qualities, or the natural disposition of his
soul. This great void I undertake to fill up, and for such a task I
possess advantages unexampled in history.

I collected and recorded, day by day, all that I saw of Napoleon, all
that I heard him say, during the period of eighteen months in which I
was constantly about his person. In these conversations, which were full
of confidence, and which seemed to pass, as it were, in another world,
he could not fail to be portrayed by himself as if in a mirror, in every
point of view, and under every aspect. Henceforth the world may freely
study him: there can be no error in the materials.

                                                        COUNT LAS CASES.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                MEMOIRS

                                   OF

                         THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON.

                                -------




                             INTRODUCTION.


It is my intention to record daily all that the Emperor Napoleon did or
said while I was about his person; but, before I begin my diary, I hope
to be excused for offering a few preliminary remarks, which may not be
altogether useless.

I never commenced the perusal of any historical work without first
wishing to know the character of the author, his situation in society,
and his political and domestic relations; in fact, all the important
circumstances of his life; conceiving that nothing but a knowledge of
these matters could furnish a key to his writings, or a safe ground of
confidence in his statements. I therefore proceed to supply in my turn
that which I always sought for in others; and, in presenting this diary,
to relate a few facts respecting my past life.

I was scarcely twenty-one years of age when the Revolution broke out,
and had just been made a _Lieutenant de Vaisseau_, which corresponded
with the rank of a field officer in the line: my family was at court,
and I had been recently presented there myself. I was not rich; but my
name and rank in life, together with my professional prospects, were
likely, according to the notions and views of the times, to enable me to
marry according to my wishes. It was at such a moment that our political
troubles burst forth.

One of the principal vices in our system of admission to the service was
that of depriving us of the benefits of a solid and finished education.
Withdrawn from school at the early age of fourteen, abandoned from that
instant to ourselves, and launched as it were on a wide waste, how was
it possible to attain the slightest notion of social organization,
public rights, or the duties of civil life?

Thus, prompted by noble prejudice, rather than by a just sense of duty,
above all, led on by a natural fondness for generous resolves, I was
amongst the first to hasten abroad and join our Princes; to save, as it
was said, the monarch from revolutionary fury, and to defend our
hereditary rights, which we could not, it was asserted, yet abandon
without shame. From the mode in which we had been educated, it required
either a very strong head or a very weak mind to resist the torrent.

The emigration soon became general; this fatal measure is but too well
known to Europe; nor can its folly, as a political blunder and a social
crime, find any excuse in the present day, except in the unenlightened
but upright character of most of those by whom it was undertaken.

Defeated on our own frontiers, discharged and disbanded by foreigners,
rejected and proscribed by the laws of our country, numbers of us
reached England, whose Ministers lost no time in landing us on the shore
of Quiberon. Being so fortunate as not to disembark, I had, after my
return, time to reflect on the horrible alternative of fighting against
our country under foreign banners; and, from this moment, my ideas,
principles, and projects were either disconcerted or entirely changed.

Despairing of events, abandoning the world and my natural sphere, I
devoted myself to study; and, under a borrowed name, went through a
second course of education in attempting to assist that of others.

After a lapse of some years, the treaty of Amiens, and the amnesty
offered by the First Consul, re-opened to us the gates of France. I had
no longer any property there: the laws had disposed of my patrimony; but
can any thing make us forget our native soil, or destroy the charm of
breathing the air of our own country!

I hurried back, and was grateful for a pardon, rendered more acceptable
since I could say with pride that I received it without having any
motives of self-reproach. When monarchy was proclaimed soon after, my
situation and sentiments were of a most singular kind. I found myself a
soldier punished for a cause that had triumphed. Every day brought us
back to our former ideas: all that had been dear to our principles and
prejudices was renewed; and yet delicacy and honour rendered it a kind
of duty in us to keep at a distance.

It was in vain that the new government loudly proclaimed the union of
all parties; and equally so that its chief had declared he would no
longer recognise any but Frenchmen in France; in vain had old friends
and former companions offered me the advantages of a new career to be
chosen by myself. Unable to subdue the conflicting feelings which
agitated my mind, I obstinately persevered in a system of self-denial;
and, devoting all my time to literature, I composed under a feigned
name, an historical work that re-established my fortune; after which I
passed five or six of the happiest years of my life.

Meanwhile, unprecedented events succeeded each other with extraordinary
rapidity: they were of such a nature, and bore so peculiar a character,
that it became impossible for any person whose heart possessed the least
predilection for whatever was great or noble to view them with
indifference. The glory of our country was raised to a pitch unknown in
the history of any other people: the administration of affairs was
unexampled, not less by its energy than the consequences it produced; a
simultaneous impulse, which was suddenly given to every species of
industry, excited the emulation of all at the same moment; the army was
unrivalled, striking terror abroad and creating a just pride at home.

Every day added to the number of our trophies, while numerous monuments
proclaimed our exploits; the victories of Austerlitz, Jena, and
Friedland; the treaties of Presburg and Tilsit had constituted France
the first of nations, and made her the arbitress of Europe. It was a
signal honour to be a Frenchman; and yet all these exploits, labours and
prodigies, were the work of one man. For my own part, whatever might
have been my former prepossessions and prejudices, I was now filled with
admiration; and, as we all know, there is but one step from admiration
to affection. It was precisely at this period that the Emperor called
some of the first families of France round his throne, and caused it to
be circulated, amongst the rest, that he would consider those who
remained aloof as bad Frenchmen. I did not hesitate for an instant: I
have, said I to myself, fulfilled the obligations of my natural oath,
that of my birth and education, to which I have continued faithful until
its extinction. Our princes too were no longer thought of: we even
doubted their existence. The solemnities of religion, the alliance of
kings, the example of Europe, and the splendour of France, henceforth
taught me that I had a new sovereign. Had those who preceded us made so
long a resistance to such powerful efforts, before rallying round the
first of the Capets? I answered therefore, for myself, that, happy in
being thus enabled to obey a call which removed me with honour from the
delicate situation in which I was placed, I freely, spontaneously, and
without reserve, transferred the zeal, loyalty, and attachment which I
had constantly cherished for my old masters, to the new sovereign: the
result of this step was my immediate admission at court.

In this state of things, I felt extremely anxious that my recent
protestations should be ratified by deeds. The English had invaded
Flushing, and threatened Antwerp; I therefore hastened to assist in the
defence of the latter place, as a volunteer; and, on the subsequent
evacuation of Flushing, my nomination to the office of chamberlain
called me near the person of the Emperor. Being desirous of adding some
more useful occupation to the duties of this honourable post, I
solicited and obtained a seat in the Council of State. Hence followed
several confidential missions: I was sent to Holland at the period of
its union to the French Empire, in order to receive whatever related to
the naval department; then to Illyria, for the purpose of liquidating
the public debt; and afterwards over half the Empire, to superintend
establishments of public beneficence. During our late misfortunes, I
received some consoling proofs that the inhabitants of the countries to
which I had thus been sent were not dissatisfied with my conduct.

Providence had however fixed a limit to our prosperity. The catastrophe
of Moscow, the disasters of Leipsic, and the siege of Paris, are well
known. I commanded in that city one of the legions which acquired honour
by its severe losses on the 31st of March. When the capitulation took
place I gave up the command, feeling that other duties were to be
performed near the person of my sovereign, but could not reach
Fontainebleau in time:—the Emperor had abdicated, and was succeeded by
the King.

My situation now became more singular than it had been twelve years
before. The cause for which I had sacrificed my fortune, for which I
remained so long in exile, and six years in a state of self-denial at
home, was at length triumphant; nevertheless, the point of honour and
other considerations were about to prevent my reaping any benefit from
the event! What could be more capricious than my fate? Two revolutions
had been effected in opposition to each other:—by the first I lost my
patrimony; by the second I might have been deprived of life: neither the
one nor the other had been favourable to my fortune. Vulgar minds will
only perceive an unfortunate tergiversation of opinions in this wayward
destiny, while the lovers of intrigue will assert that I was twice a
dupe: only the few will understand that I have twice honourably
fulfilled my duty. Be this as it may, those early friends, whose esteem
was not lessened by the line of conduct I had pursued, having now become
all powerful, invited me to join them: it was impossible to obey the
generous call; disgusted and disheartened, I resolved that my public
life should terminate. Ought I to have exposed myself to the false
judgment of those who were watching my proceedings? Could every body see
what was passing in my mind?

Having now become a Frenchman even to enthusiasm, and unable to endure
that national degradation of which I was a daily witness amidst foreign
bayonets, I determined to endeavour to divert my thoughts at a distance
from the scene of calamity, and went to pass a few months in England.
How altered did every thing appear there! On reflection, I found that it
was myself who had undergone a great change.

I had scarcely returned, when Napoleon appeared on our coasts: he was
transported to the capital as it were by magic, and this without
battles, excesses, or effusion of blood. I thought I saw the stain
brought on us by foreign hands effaced, and all our glory restored.
Destiny had ordered otherwise!

No sooner did I hear of the Emperor’s arrival, than I spontaneously
repaired to attend on his person. I was present at the moment of
abdication; and, when the question of his removal was agitated, I
requested permission to participate in his fate. Such had been till then
the disinterestedness and simplicity, some will say folly, of my
conduct, that, notwithstanding my daily intercourse as an officer of the
household and member of his council, Napoleon scarcely knew me. “Do you
know whither your offer may lead you?” said he, in his astonishment. “I
have made no calculation about it,” I replied. He accepted me, and I am
at St. Helena.

I have now made myself known; the reader has my credentials in his
hands: a host of contemporaries are living—it will be seen whether a
single individual amongst them stands up to invalidate them: I therefore
begin my task.

               RETURN OF THE EMPEROR TO THE ELYSÉE, AFTER
                        THE BATTLE OF WATERLOO.

Tuesday, June 20th, 1815.—Heard of the Emperor’s return to the Elysée
Palace: placed myself in immediate attendance there. Found Messrs.
Montalambert and Montholon there, brought by the same sentiment.

Napoleon had just lost a great battle; so that the safety of the nation
thenceforth depended on the wisdom and zeal of the Chamber of
Representatives. The Emperor, still covered with dust from the field of
Waterloo, was on the point of hurrying into the midst of them, there to
declare our dangers and resources, and to engage that his personal
interests should never be a barrier to the happiness of France; after
which he intended to quit Paris immediately. It is said that several
persons dissuaded him from this step, by leading him to apprehend an
approaching ferment amongst the deputies.

It is as yet impossible to comprehend every report that circulates with
regard to this fatal battle: some say there is manifest treason; others,
a fatality without example. Thirty thousand men under Grouchy lost their
way and were too late, taking no part in the engagement; the army,
victorious till the evening, was, it is said, suddenly seized with a
panic towards eight o’clock, and became broken in an instant. It is
another Crecy, another Azincourt,———![1] every one trembles and thinks
all is lost!

Footnote 1:

  I had put in the text _une véritable Journée des Eperons_,[2] and must
  not omit to state what led to its being expunged.

  The Emperor who alone knew I kept a journal at St. Helena, one day
  expressed a wish that I should read a few pages to him: on coming to
  this expression, inadvertently thrown in, he suddenly exclaimed, “What
  have you done! Erase, erase, sir, quickly! _Une Journée des Eperons!_
  what a calumny! Ah! unfortunate army! brave men! you never fought
  better!” Then after a pause of a few moments, he added in a tone
  expressive of deep feeling:—“We had some base wretches amongst us! May
  heaven forgive them! But as to France, will _she_ ever recover from
  the effects of that ill-fated day!”

Footnote 2:

  In allusion to the battle of Guinegatte, fought near Boulogne in 1513,
  between the army of Henry VIII. and that of France. The French were
  completely routed on this occasion, and the celebrated Bayard taken
  prisoner while covering the retreat; this was so precipitate that the
  day was ever after styled _La Journée des Eperons_ (or day of spurs),
  because as stated by contemporary historians, the French army made
  more use of their spurs than lances.—_Editor._

                            THE ABDICATION.

21st.—The best intentioned and most influential members of the national
representation have been tampered with all last evening and all night,
by certain persons, who, if their word is to be taken, produce authentic
documents and demi-official papers guaranteeing the safety of France, on
condition of the mere abdication of the Emperor, as they pretend.

The above opinion had become so strong this morning that it seemed
irresistible: the president of the assembly, the first men in the state,
and the Emperor’s particular friends, come to supplicate him to save
France by abdicating. Though by no means convinced, yet the Emperor
answers with magnanimity:—he abdicates!

This circumstance causes the greatest bustle round the Elysée; the
multitude rushes towards the gate, and testifies the deepest interest;
numbers penetrate within the hall, while some even of the popular class
scale the walls; some in tears, others in a state approaching to
distraction, crowd up to the Emperor, who is walking tranquilly in the
garden, and make offers of every description. Napoleon alone is calm,
constantly replying that they ought in future to employ this zeal and
tenderness for the good of their country.

I presented the deputation of Representatives, in the course of the day:
it came to thank the Emperor for his devotedness to the national
interests.

The documents and state-papers, which have produced such a powerful
sensation, and brought about the grand event of this day, are said to be
official communications of Messrs. Fouché and Metternich, in which the
latter guarantees Napoleon II. and the regency, in case of the
abdication of the Emperor. These communications must have been long
carried on unknown to Napoleon. M. Fouché must have a furious partiality
for clandestine operations. It is well known that his first disgrace,
which took place several years ago, arose from his having opened some
negotiations with England of his own accord, without the Emperor’s
knowledge: he has in fact always shewn the greatest obliquity in affairs
of moment. God grant that his present mysterious acts do not prove fatal
to our country!

       DEPUTATION OF THE CHAMBER OF PEERS.—CAULAINCOURT.—FOUCHÉ.

22nd.—Went home to pass a few hours at my own house: in the course of
this day the deputation of the Peers was presented: a portion of the
Provisional Government was named in the evening. Caulaincourt and
Fouché, who were of the number, happened to be with us in the
ante-chamber: we complimented the first on his nomination, which was,
indeed, only congratulating ourselves on the public good: his reply was
full of alarm. “We applaud the choice hitherto known,” said we. “It is
certain,” observed Fouché, with an air of levity, “that I am not
suspected.”—“If you had been,“ rudely rejoined the deputy Boulay de la
Meurthe, who was also present, “be assured we should not have named
you.”

                THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT PRESENTED TO
                              THE EMPEROR.

23rd—The acclamations and interest without continued at the Elysée. I
presented the members of the Provisional Government to the Emperor, who,
in dismissing them, directed the Duke Decrés to see them out. The
Emperor’s brothers, Joseph, Lucien, and Jerome, were introduced
frequently through the day, and conversed with him for some time.

As usual, there was a great multitude of people collected round the
palace in the evening: their numbers were constantly increasing. Their
acclamations and the interest shewn for the Emperor created considerable
uneasiness amongst the different factions. The fermentation of the
capital now became so great that Napoleon determined to depart on the
following day.

                     THE EMPEROR QUITS THE ELYSÉE.

25th.—I accompanied the Emperor to Malmaison, and again requested
permission to follow his future fortunes. My proposal seemed to create
astonishment, for I was still only known to him by my employments; but
he accepted the offer.

26th.—My wife came to see me; she had divined my intentions: it became a
somewhat delicate task to avow them, and still more difficult to
convince her of their propriety. “My dear,” said I, “in following the
dutiful dictates of my heart, it is consoling to reflect that your
interests are not thereby prejudiced. If Napoleon II. is to govern us, I
leave you strong claims on his protection; should Heaven order it
differently, I shall have secured you a glorious asylum, a name honoured
with some esteem. At all events we shall meet again, at least in a
better world.” After tears and even reproaches, which could not but be
gratifying, she consented to my departure, exacting a promise however,
that I would allow her to join me without loss of time. From this moment
she manifested a courage and strength of mind that would have animated
myself in case of necessity.

               THE MINISTER OF MARINE COMES TO MALMAISON.

27th.—I went to Paris for a short time with the minister of Marine, who
came to Malmaison, on business respecting the frigates destined for the
Emperor. He read me the instructions drawn out for the commanders, said
his Majesty depended on my zeal, and intended taking me with him;
adding, that he would take care of my family during my absence.

Napoleon II. is proclaimed by the Legislature.

Sent for my son from his school, having determined that he should
accompany me. We prepared a small parcel of clothes and linen, then
proceeded to Malmaison, accompanied by my wife, who returned
immediately. The road had now become rather unsafe, owing to the
approach of the enemy.

28th.—Being desirous of making some other arrangements before our
departure, the Duchess de Rovigo took me and my son to Paris in her
carriage. I found Messrs. de Vertillac and de Quitry at my house; these
were the last friends I embraced: they were terrified. The agitation and
uncertainty hourly increased in the capital, for the enemy was at the
gates. On reaching Malmaison, we saw the bridge of Chatou in flames:
guards were posted round the palace, and it became prudent to remain
within the park walls. I went into the Emperor’s room, and described how
Paris had appeared to me; stating the general opinion that Fouché openly
betrayed the National cause; and that the hopes of all patriots were
that his Majesty would this very night join the army who loudly called
for him. The Emperor listened to me with an air of deep thought, but
made no reply, and I withdrew soon after.

               NAPOLEON QUITS MALMAISON, AND DEPARTS FOR
                               ROCHEFORT.

29th-30th.—A cry of Long live the Emperor! was continually heard on the
great road to Saint Germain; it proceeded from the troops who passed
under the walls of Malmaison.

Towards noon. General Becker came from Paris, sent by the Provisional
government; he told us, with feelings of indignation, that he had
received a commission to guard and watch Napoleon.[3]

Footnote 3:

  On my return to Europe, chance threw the following documents in my
  way, relative to the above circumstance. I transcribe them here,
  because I believe they are unknown to the public. They have been
  copied from the originals, and require no commentary.

  Copy of a letter from the Commission of Government to Marshal Prince
  d’Eckmuhl, Minister at War.

                                             Paris, June 27th, 1815.

  Sir,—Such is the state of affairs that it is indispensable for
  Napoleon to decide on departing, and proceeding to the Isle of Aix. If
  he does not determine to do so on your notifying to him the annexed
  resolutions, you are to cause him to be watched at Malmaison, to
  prevent his escape. For this purpose, you will place a requisite
  portion of gendarmerie and troops of the line at the disposal of
  General Becker, so as to guard all the avenues leading to Malmaison in
  every direction. You will give orders to the chief inspector of
  gendarmerie to this effect. These measures must be kept as secret as
  possible.

  This letter is intended for yourself; but General Becker, who will be
  charged with delivering the resolutions to Napoleon, will receive
  particular instructions from your Excellency, and inform Napoleon that
  they have been drawn up with a view to the interest of the state, and
  for the safety of his person; that their prompt execution is
  indispensable; and, finally, that his future interests make them
  absolutely necessary.

                                   (Signed)     THE DUKE OF OTRANTO.

  Copy of the resolutions entered into by the Commission of Government,
  extracted from the Minutes of the department of the Secretary of
  State.

                                             Paris, June 26th, 1815.

  The Commission of Government resolves as follows:

  Art. I. The Minister of Marine shall give orders for two frigates to
  be prepared at Rochefort, to convey Napoleon Bonaparte to the United
  States. Art. II. Should he require it, a sufficient escort shall
  attend him to the place of embarkation under the orders of
  Lieutenant-general Becker, who will be instructed to provide for his
  safety.

  Art. III. The Director-general of Posts will, on his part, give the
  necessary orders relative to the relays.

  Art. IV. The Minister of Marine will issue the requisite orders for
  insuring the immediate return of the frigates, after the
  disembarkation.

  Art. V. The frigates are not to quit Rochefort before the arrival of
  the safe-conducts.

  Art. VI. The Ministers of Marine, War, and Finances, are each charged
  with the execution of that part of the present resolutions which
  concerns them respectively.

                                   (Signed)     THE DUKE OF OTRANTO.

  By order of the Commission of Government, the Assistant Secretary of
  State.

                                         (Signed)     COUNT BERLIER.

  Copy of the Duke of Otranto’s letter to the Minister at War.

                                    Paris, June 27th, 1815, at noon.

  Sir,—I transmit to you a copy of the letter I have just written to the
  Minister of Marine, relative to Napoleon. A perusal of it will
  convince you of the necessity of giving orders to General Becker not
  to separate himself from the person of Napoleon, whilst the latter
  remains in the roads of Aix.

                                   (Signed)     THE DUKE OF OTRANTO.

  Copy of the letter to the Minister of Marine alluded to in the
  foregoing.

                                       Paris, June 27th, 1815, noon.

  Sir,—The Commission reminds you of the instructions it transmitted to
  you an hour ago. The resolutions must be executed as prescribed by the
  Commission yesterday; and according to which, Napoleon Bonaparte will
  remain in the roads of Aix until the arrival of his passports.

  The welfare of the State, which cannot be indifferent to him, requires
  that he should remain there until his fate and that of his family has
  been definitively regulated. Every means will be employed to render
  the result of the negotiation satisfactory to him. The honour of
  France is interested in it; but, in the mean time, all possible
  precautions must be taken for the personal security of Napoleon, and
  that he does not quit the place which is temporarily assigned him.

  The President of the Commission of Government.

                                   (Signed)     THE DUKE OF OTRANTO.

  Letter from the Minister at War to General Becker.

                                             Paris, June 27th, 1815.

  Sir,—I have the honour of transmitting to you the annexed resolutions
  which the Commission of Government charges you to notify to the
  Emperor Napoleon; observing to his Majesty that circumstances are so
  imperious as to make it indispensable he should decide on setting out
  for the Isle of Aix. These resolutions, observes the Commission, have
  been made as much for the safety of his person, as for the interest of
  the state, which must ever be dear to him.

  If his Majesty does not make up his mind, on these resolutions being
  notified to him, it is the intention of the Commission of Government
  that the necessary steps shall be taken to prevent the escape of his
  Majesty and every attempt against his person.

  I have to repeat, General, that these resolutions have been adopted
  for the interest of the state, and for the personal safety of the
  Emperor; also, that the Commission of Government considers their
  prompt execution as indispensable for the future welfare of his
  Majesty and his family.

  I have the honour to be, &c.

  N. B. The above letter remained without any signature; at the moment
  of sending it off, the Prince of Eckmuhl observed to his secretary, “I
  will never sign this letter—sign it yourself, that will be
  sufficient.” The secretary found himself equally incapable of putting
  his name to such a communication. Was it sent or not?—This is a point
  which I cannot decide.

A sentiment the most base had dictated this choice: Fouché knew that
General Becker had a private pique against the Emperor, and therefore
did not doubt of finding in the former a man disposed to vengeance; but
he was grossly deceived in his expectations, for Becker constantly
shewed a degree of respect and attachment to the Emperor highly
honourable to his own character.

Meanwhile time pressed. When on the point of setting out, the Emperor
sent a message to the Provisional Government, by General Becker,
offering to place himself at the head of the army, merely as a private
citizen, adding, that, after having repulsed Blucher, he would continue
his route. On the refusal of this offer, we left Malmaison; the Emperor
and a part of his suite taking the road to Rochefort by Tours; I and my
son, with Messieurs Montholon, Planat, and Résigny, proceeded towards
Orleans, as did also two or three other carriages. We reached this place
early on the 30th, and got to Chatellerault at midnight.

July 1st–2nd. We passed through Limoges on the 1st, at four in the
afternoon; dined at Rochefoucault on the 2nd, and reached Jarnac about
seven. We slept here, owing to the obstinacy of the postmaster, which
forced us to remain till next day.

3rd.—We could not set out before five o’clock. On account of the
misconduct of the postmaster, who, not content with detaining us all
night, had recourse to secret means for keeping us still longer, we were
obliged to proceed at a slow pace to Cognac, where the postmaster and
inhabitants received us very differently. It was easy to perceive that
our journey occasioned a great deal of agitation amongst all parties. On
reaching Saintes, towards eleven o’clock, we nearly fell victims to the
fury of some miscreants, collected by an officer of the royal guard, a
native of that place. This person had prepared an ambuscade for us, and
had even laid a plan for our assassination. We were arrested by the mob,
but a part of the national guard interfered, and conducted us as
prisoners to an adjoining inn. It was said that we were carrying off the
treasures of the State, and therefore merited death. Some of them, who
pretended to be the most distinguished inhabitants, and above all, the
women, were the most outrageous, and called for our immediate execution.

We saw these females pass in succession before some windows that were
open near our temporary prison, in order that their insults should not
be lost upon us. It will scarcely be credited that they went so far as
to gnash their teeth in sign of hatred, and from vexation at seeing the
indifference we displayed; yet they formed the fashionable circle of
Saintes! Could Real be in the right, when he told the Emperor, during
the hundred days, that as for Jacobins, he had reason to know something
of them; protesting that the only difference between the blacks and
whites was that the former wore wooden shoes and the latter silk
stockings?

Prince Joseph, who was passing through Saintes unknown to us, came to
increase the interest of our adventure. He was also arrested, and
conducted to the prefecture; but highly respected.

The windows of the inn faced a large square, which continued to be
filled with an agitated and hostile rabble, who were extremely violent
and abusive. I found an old acquaintance in the under-prefect, who was
thus enabled to state who we were. The carriage in which we travelled
was next examined; while we were ourselves retained in a species of
solitary confinement. I obtained leave, however, to visit the Prince
about four o’clock.

While on my way to the prefecture, and though guarded by a
non-commissioned officer, several individuals addressed me: some put
notes secretly into my hands; others whispered something friendly; while
all united in assuring me we might feel perfectly tranquil, for the
patriots and well-intentioned inhabitants would protect us.

Towards the evening we were allowed to depart; and by this time things
had so totally changed that we left the inn amidst the most lively
acclamations: females of the lower classes, in tears, kissed our hands:
many persons offered to accompany us, that we might avoid the enemies of
the Emperor, who, they said, lay in wait to murder us, at a short
distance from the town. This singular transition arose in some degree
from the arrival of numbers of country people and federates, who gave an
immediate turn to public opinion.

4th.—On approaching Rochefort we met a party of gendarmerie, who, on the
report of our reception at Saintes, had been dispatched to meet us. We
arrived at this place about two o’clock in the morning: the Emperor had
reached it on the preceding evening.[4] Prince Joseph arrived in the
afternoon; when I conducted him to the Emperor.

Footnote 4:

  The following is the Emperor’s Itinerary during the journey:—Left
  Paris on the 29th June, and slept at Rambouillet; at Tours on the
  30th; and at Niort on the 1st July. Left Niort on the 2nd, and reached
  Rochefort on the 3rd; remained there till the 8th; embarked on board
  the Bellerophon on the 15th.

I profited by the first moment of leisure to inform the President of the
Council of State why I absented myself. “Rapid and important events,”
said I “obliged me to quit Paris without the necessary leave of absence.
The peculiarity and importance of the case led to this irregularity:
being in attendance on the Emperor at the moment of his departure, it
was impossible to see the great man, who had governed us with so much
splendour, and who had banished himself to facilitate the tranquillity
of France, of whose power nothing now remains but its glory and name;—I
repeat, that I could not allow him to depart without yielding to the
desire of following his steps. During the days of his prosperity he
condescended to bestow some favours on me; I now owe him all that I can
offer, whether of sentiment or of action.”

5th-7th. At Rochefort, the Emperor laid aside his military dress. He
lived at the prefecture; numbers were constantly grouped round the
house; and acclamations continued to be frequently repeated. The Emperor
appeared two or three times at the balcony. Numerous proposals were made
to him, both by generals who came in person, and others who sent
emissaries.

During our stay here the Emperor has led the same sort of life as if at
the Tuileries: we do not approach his person more frequently: he
scarcely receives any persons but Bertrand and Savary; so that we are
reduced to reports and conjectures as to all that concerns him. It is,
however, evident that, in the midst of this state of agitation, he
continues calm and resolute, even to indifference, without manifesting
the least anxiety.

A lieutenant of our navy, who commands a Danish merchant-ship, has
generously offered to save the Emperor. He proposes to take him on board
alone; engages to conceal his person in such a way that it will escape
the severest scrutiny; and, moreover, will immediately set sail for the
United States. He demands but a small sum by way of indemnifying his
owners for any loss they may sustain through his enterprize. Bertrand
agrees, under certain conditions, which he has drawn out in my name. I
have signed this fictitious bargain in presence and under the eyes of
the maritime prefect.

                      EMBARKATION OF THE EMPEROR.

8th.—The Emperor proceeded to Fourras in the evening, followed by the
acclamations of the people wherever he passed. He slept on board the
Saal,[5] which he reached about eight o’clock. I did not arrive till a
much later hour, having had to accompany Madame Bertrand in another
boat, and from a different point.

Footnote 5:

  The name of one of the frigates destined to receive Napoleon on
  board.—ED.

9th.—I attended the Emperor, who disembarked at an early hour in the
Isle of Aix: he visited all the fortifications, and returned on board to
breakfast.

10th.—I was dispatched towards the British cruisers, with the Duke de
Rovigo, early in the morning, to know whether they had received the
passes, which had been promised to us by the Provisional Government, to
proceed to the United States. The answer was, that they had not; but
that the matter should be instantly referred to the Commander-in-chief.
Having stated the supposition of the Emperor’s setting sail with the
frigates under flags of truce; it was replied, that they would be
attacked. We then spoke of his passage in a neutral ship; and were told,
in reply, that all neutrals would be strictly examined, and, perhaps,
even carried into an English port; but we were recommended to proceed to
England; and it was asserted that in that country we should have no ill
usage to fear. We returned at two in the afternoon.

The Bellerophon, having followed, soon after anchored in Basque Roads,
in order to be nearer to us; so that the ships of both nations were now
in view of, and very near, each other.

On reaching the Bellerophon, the captain addressed us in French: I was
not eager to inform him that I knew something of his own language. Some
expressions which passed between him and his officers might have injured
the negotiation, had I seemed to understand them. When, a short time
after, it was asked, whether we understood English, I allowed the Duke
of Rovigo to reply in the negative. Our situation was quite sufficient
to remove any scruples I might have otherwise entertained, and rendered
this little deception very pardonable. I only mention this circumstance,
because, as I remained a fortnight amongst these people, I was compelled
to impose a tiresome restraint upon myself, to avoid disclosing what I
had concealed in the first instance. In fact, though I could read the
language with facility, yet, owing to an absence of thirteen years and
consequent want of practice, it was with considerable difficulty I
understood English when spoken.

11th.—All the outlets being blockaded by English ships of war, the
Emperor seemed extremely uncertain as to what plan he should pursue.
Neutral vessels, and _chasse-marées_,[6] manned by young naval officers,
were suggested for his conveyance; propositions also continued to be
made from the interior.

Footnote 6:

  Small vessels, not unlike luggers, and usually employed as
  coasting-vessels in France.—ED.

12th.—The Emperor disembarked at the Isle of Aix, amidst cries of
exultation on every side. He quitted the frigates in consequence of the
Commandant’s having refused to sail; whether from weakness of character,
or owing to his having received fresh orders from the Provisional
Government, is not known. Many were of opinion that the attempt might be
made with some probability of success; but it must be allowed that the
winds still continued unfavourable.

13th.—Prince Joseph visited his brother in the course of the day.
Towards eleven at night the Emperor was on the point of embarking in one
of the chasse marées; two sailed, having on board a great part of his
luggage and several of his attendants. M. de Planat was in one of them.

14th.—I returned to the Bellerophon at four in the morning, accompanied
by General Lallemand, to ascertain whether any answer had been received.
The Captain told us he expected it every moment; adding, that if the
Emperor would embark immediately for England, he had instructions to
convey him thither. He farther declared it as his private opinion, and
several captains who were present expressed themselves to the same
effect, that there was not the least doubt of Napoleon’s meeting with
all possible respect and good treatment: that there, neither the king
nor his ministers exercised the same arbitrary authority as those of the
Continent: that the English people possessed a generosity of sentiment,
and liberality of opinion, superior to sovereignty itself. I replied
that I would return and communicate the Captain’s offer to the Emperor,
as well as the whole of his conversation. I added that I thought I had a
sufficient knowledge of the Emperor Napoleon’s character to induce a
belief that he would not feel much hesitation in proceeding to England
thus confidentially, so as to be able to continue his voyage to the
United States. I described all France, south of the Loire, as being in a
blaze, and the hopes of the people as constantly turning towards
Napoleon, as long as he was present; stated the propositions hourly made
to him from various directions; his determination not to become either
the cause or pretext of a civil war; the generosity shewn by him in
abdicating, merely to render the conclusion of a peace more easy; and
the firm resolution he had taken to banish himself, in order to make it
more prompt and complete.

General Lallemand, who, from having been condemned to death, was
interested on his own account in the determination that might be made,
asked Captain Maitland, whom he formerly knew in Egypt, and whose
prisoner I think he had been, if persons implicated in the civil
dissensions of his country, like himself, and going thus voluntarily to
England, had any reason to fear being ever delivered up to France? The
Captain replied that they had not: repelling the doubt as an insult.
Previously to our separating, the conference was summed up, by my
repeating that it was possible, from the state of affairs, and his own
intentions, that the Emperor would avail himself of Captain Maitland’s
offer, so as to get safe-conducts for America. The latter begged it to
be understood that he would not guarantee the permission we demanded
being granted; upon which we departed. To say the truth, I did not
myself think it would be given; but the Emperor, wishing to lead a life
of tranquillity in future, had resolved to be a stranger to political
concerns; we therefore considered the probability of not being allowed
to leave England, without much uneasiness; but our fears and conjectures
went no farther. It is very likely that Captain Maitland was of the same
opinion: at all events, I will do him, as well as the other officers,
the justice to believe they were honest and sincere in the account they
gave us of the sentiments of the people of England.

We reached the island at eleven o’clock; meanwhile the storm approached,
and time became precious: it was necessary to decide one way or another.
The Emperor having assembled us in a sort of council, all the chances of
escape were discussed: that of the Danish vessel seemed impracticable,
and the chasse-marées were no longer thought of; the English cruisers
were not to be forced; so that there seemed only two alternatives—either
to renew the war, or to accept the offers of Captain Maitland: the
latter was chosen. On reaching the Bellerophon, we said, we shall be at
once on British ground; the English will then find themselves bound by
the ties of hospitality, which are held sacred amongst the most
barbarous nations; we shall also be under the civil rights and
privileges of the country. The people of England will not be so
insensible to their glory as not to seize so fortunate a circumstance
with avidity: upon this, Napoleon wrote the following letter to the
Prince Regent.

“ROYAL HIGHNESS—Exposed to the factions which divide my country, and to
the hostility of the greatest powers of Europe, I have closed my
political career. I come, like Themistocles, to seek the hospitality of
the British nation. I place myself under the protection of their laws,
which I claim from your Royal Highness, as the most powerful, the most
constant, and the most generous, of my enemies.

                                       (Signed)          “NAPOLEON.”

I set out about four o’clock, with my son and General Gourgaud, to go on
board the Bellerophon, whence I was not again to return. My mission was
to announce that his Majesty would come on the following morning; and,
moreover, to deliver the letter above quoted to Captain Maitland.
General Gourgaud was commissioned to carry the Emperor’s letter to the
Prince Regent immediately, and to present it in person. Captain Maitland
read Napoleon’s letter, which he greatly admired. Two other captains
were permitted to take copies of it, to be kept secret till the letter
should be made public; after which no time was lost in despatching
Gourgaud in the Slaney, a sloop of war, forming part of the squadron.

Soon after the Slaney had parted company with the Bellerophon, and while
I was seated in the captain’s cabin of the latter with my son, Captain
Maitland, who had gone to issue some orders, suddenly entered, and with
a countenance expressive of deep concern, exclaimed, “Count Las Cases, I
am deceived when I treat with you. The consequence of detaching one of
my ships is, as I have just heard, that Napoleon has escaped. Should
this be the case, it will place me in a dreadful situation with my
Government.” These words startled me; I would have given the world had
they been true. The Emperor had made no engagement; I was perfectly
sincere; and would, therefore, most willingly have become the victim of
an event of which I was quite innocent. I asked Captain Maitland, with
the utmost coolness, at what hour the Emperor was said to have set out.
He had been so astonished that he had not given himself time to inquire;
but went out again to ascertain this point; and on returning, said, “At
twelve o’clock.” If that be the case, I replied, the Slaney’s departure
can do no harm, as you have only just sent her away; but do not be
uneasy, for I left the Emperor in the Isle of Aix at four o’clock. “Do
you assure me of that?” said he. On my repeating the assertion, he
turned to some officers who were with him, and observed, in English,
that the intelligence must be false, as I was too calm, and seemed to be
sincere; and that I had, besides, pledged my word on the subject.

The English cruisers had numerous sources of information on our coast: I
was subsequently enabled to ascertain that they were minutely informed
of all our proceedings.[7]

Footnote 7:

  While on our passage to St. Helena, Admiral Cockburn placed his
  library at our disposal. One of our party in turning over the leaves
  of a volume of the _Encyclopædia Britannica_, found a letter from La
  Rochelle, addressed to the commanding officer of the English squadron:
  it contained, word for word, the whole of our affair relative to the
  Danish ship; the moment of her projected departure, future intentions,
  &c. We passed this letter from hand to hand, taking care that it
  should be replaced where first discovered. It gave us very little
  information; we were aware of the understanding which existed both in
  and out of France, but were desirous of seeing a proof of it so much
  to the point. How did this letter happen to get on board the
  Northumberland? Captain Maitland had doubtless, when transferring us
  to that ship, also delivered up the documents concerning our capture.
  This was the letter which occasioned so much alarm on the part of the
  Captain, relative to the supposed escape of the Emperor, soon after my
  embarkation.

Nothing was now thought of but preparing for the next day. Captain
Maitland having asked whether I wished his boats to be sent for the
Emperor, I replied, that the separation was too painful for the French
seamen, not to let them have the satisfaction of attending him to the
last moment.

                  EMBARKATION OF NAPOLEON ON BOARD THE
                              BELLEROPHON.

15th.—At daylight, one of our brigs, the Epervier, was seen under weigh,
and coming towards the Bellerophon, having a flag of truce flying. Both
wind and tide being contrary, Captain Maitland sent his barge to meet
her. Seeing the boat return, the Captain was extremely anxious to
discover, with his spy-glass, whether the Emperor was on board; he
frequently begged that I would look myself, but I could not as yet reply
with certainty: at length the matter was placed beyond farther doubt, as
the Emperor came alongside surrounded by all his attendants. I stood at
the gangway to present Captain Maitland, to whom he said, “I come on
board your ship, to place myself under the protection of the laws of
England.”—The Captain then led him into his cabin, of which the Emperor
was immediately put in possession. All the officers of the Bellerophon
were presented to him soon after; this ceremony over, he came out of the
cabin, and visited every part of the ship during the morning. I related
the alarm felt by Captain Maitland the preceding evening, relative to
his escape; the Emperor did not see the matter in the light in which it
had appeared to me—“What had he to fear?” he asked, in an emphatic and
dignified manner—“were not you in his power?“

[Illustration:

  NAPOLEON ON BOARD THE BELLEROPHON.
  London: Published for Henry Colburn, March, 1836.
]

Towards three o’clock, the Superb, a seventy-four gun ship, bearing the
flag of Rear-Admiral Hotham, the Commander on the station, anchored
close to the Bellerophon. The Admiral came to visit the Emperor, and
remained to dinner. From the questions asked by Napoleon relative to his
ship, he expressed a wish to know whether his Majesty would condescend
to go on board the following day; upon which the Emperor said he had no
objection, and would therefore breakfast with the Admiral accompanied by
all his attendants.

16th.—Attended the Emperor on board the Superb: all the honours, except
those of firing cannon, were liberally paid; we went round the ship, and
examined the most trifling objects; every thing seemed to be in
admirable order. Admiral Hotham evinced, throughout, all the refinement
and grace of a man of rank and education. On our return to the
Bellerophon, she got under weigh, and made sail for England: this event
took place twelve days after our departure from Paris. It was almost a
calm.

On our leaving the Bellerophon in the morning to visit the Superb, the
Emperor stopped short in front of the guard drawn up on the quarter-deck
to salute him. He made them perform several movements, giving the word
of command himself; having desired them to charge bayonets, and
perceiving that this motion was not performed altogether in the French
manner, he advanced into the midst of the soldiers, put the weapons
aside with his hands, and seized a musquet from one of the rear rank,
with which he went through the exercise himself, according to our
method. A sudden movement and change of countenance amongst the officers
and others who were present, sufficiently expressed their astonishment
at seeing the Emperor thus carelessly place himself amidst English
bayonets, some of which came in contact with his person. This
circumstance produced a most striking effect. On returning from the
Superb, we were indirectly questioned on the subject, and asked whether
the Emperor ever acted in the same way with his own soldiers; while the
greatest surprise was expressed at his confidence. Not one amongst the
officers had formed any idea of sovereigns who could thus explain and
execute their own commands; it was therefore easy to perceive that they
had no just conception of the personage now before them, notwithstanding
his having been so marked an object of attention and curiosity for above
twenty years.

17th-18th. Though nearly a calm, we lost sight of land.

19th.—The wind being very strong, though not favourable, we proceeded at
the rate of nine miles an hour.

20th-22d. We continued our course, with winds that were by no means
favourable.

The Emperor had not been long amongst his most inveterate enemies, those
who had been continually fed with rumours no less absurd than
irritating, before he acquired all the influence over them which belongs
to glory. The captain, officers, and crew, soon adopted the etiquette of
his suite, shewing him exactly the same attention and respect; the
Captain addressed him either as _Sire_ or _your Majesty_; when he
appeared on deck, every one took off his hat, and remained uncovered
while he was present—this was not the case at first. There was no
entering his cabin, except by passing the attendants: no persons but
those who were invited appeared at his table. Napoleon was, in fact, an
Emperor, on board the Bellerophon. He often appeared on deck, conversing
either with some of his suite or the officers of the ship.

Of all those who had accompanied the Emperor, I was perhaps the person
of whom he knew the least; it has already been seen that,
notwithstanding my employments near his person, I had enjoyed but little
immediate intercourse with Napoleon; since our leaving Paris he had
scarcely spoken to me, but I was now addressed very frequently.

The occasion and circumstances were highly favourable to me: I was
sufficiently acquainted with the English language to be able to give
various explanations as to what was passing around us. I had been in the
navy, and could afford the Emperor any information he required relative
to the manœuvres of the ship, and state of the weather. I had been
ten years in England, and had formed definite notions of the laws,
manners, and customs of the people; which enabled me to reply to the
Emperor’s questions with facility. My Historical Atlas, too, had stored
my mind with a number of facts, dates, and coincidences, upon which he
always found me prepared to answer.

A part of my time was occupied in drawing up the following summary of
our situation at Rochefort, and the ideas which had influenced the
determination of the Emperor. Hence I had precise and authentic data to
judge from.

                 SUMMARY DICTATED BY NAPOLEON HIMSELF.

The English squadron was not strong: there were two sloops of war off
Bordeaux, they blockaded a French corvette, and gave chace to American
vessels which sailed daily in great numbers. At the Isle of Aix we had
two frigates well armed; the Vulcan corvette, one of the largest vessels
of its class, and a large brig, lay in the roads: the whole of this
force was blockaded by an English seventy-four of the smallest class,
and an indifferent sloop or two. There is not the least doubt that by
risking the sacrifice of one or two of our ships, we should have passed,
but the senior captain was deficient in resolution, and refused to sail;
the second in command was quite determined, and would have made the
attempt: the former had probably received secret instructions from
Fouché, who already openly betrayed the Emperor, and wanted to give him
up. However that may be, there was nothing to be done by sea. The
Emperor then landed at the Isle of Aix.

“Had the mission been confided to Admiral Verhuel,” said Napoleon, “as
was promised on our departure from Paris, it is probable that he would
have sailed.” The officers and crews of both frigates were full of
attachment and enthusiasm. The garrison of Aix was composed of fifteen
hundred seamen, forming a very fine regiment; the officers were so
indignant at the frigate not sailing, that they proposed to fit out two
chasse-marées of fifteen tons’ each: the midshipmen wished to navigate
them; but, when on the point of putting this plan into execution, it was
said there would be great difficulty in gaining the American coast
without touching at some point of Spain or Portugal.

Under these circumstances the Emperor composed a species of council,
from amongst the persons of his suite: here it was represented that we
could no longer calculate on the frigates or other armed vessels; that
the chasse-marées held out no probable chance of success, and could only
lead to capture by the English cruisers in the open sea, or to falling
into the hands of the allies: only two alternatives remained; to proceed
towards the interior, once more to try the fate of arms; or to seek an
asylum in England. To follow up the first, there were fifteen hundred
seamen, full of zeal and willing to act: the commandant of the Island
was an old officer of the army of Egypt, entirely devoted to Napoleon:
the Emperor would have proceeded at the head of these to Rochefort,
where the corps would have been increased by the garrison, which was
also extremely well disposed: the garrison of La Rochelle, composed of
four battalions of federated troops, had offered their services: with
these we might then have joined General Clausel, so firmly fixed at the
head of the army at Bordeaux, or General Lamarque, who had performed
prodigies, with that of La Vendée; both these officers expected and
wished to see Napoleon: it would have been very easy to maintain a civil
war in the interior. But Paris was taken, and the Chambers had been
dissolved; there were, besides, from five to six hundred thousand of the
enemy’s troops in France: a civil war could therefore have no other
result than leading to the destruction of all these generous men who
were attached to Napoleon. This loss would have been severe and
irreparable: it would have destroyed the future resources of the nation,
without producing any other advantage than placing the Emperor in a
position to treat and obtain stipulations favourable to his interests.
But Napoleon had renounced sovereignty; he only wanted a tranquil
asylum; he abhorred the thought of seeing all his friends perish to
attain so trifling a result; he was equally averse to become the pretext
for the provinces being ravaged; and above all, he did not wish to
deprive the national party of its truest supports, which would sooner or
later reestablish the honour and independence of France. Napoleon’s only
wish was to live as a private individual in future: America was the most
proper place, and that of his choice. But even England, with its
positive laws, might also answer; and it appeared, from the nature of my
first interview with Captain Maitland, that the latter was empowered to
convey the Emperor and suite to England to be equitably treated. From
this moment we were under the protection of British laws; and the people
of England were too fond of glory to lose an opportunity which thus
presented itself, and that ought to have formed the proudest page of
their history. It was therefore resolved to surrender to the English
cruisers, as soon as Captain Maitland should positively declare his
orders to receive us. On renewing the negotiation, he clearly stated
that he had the authority of his Government to receive the Emperor, if
he would come on board the Bellerophon, and to convey him, as well as
his suite, to England. Napoleon went on board, not that he was
constrained to it by events, since he could have remained in France; but
because he wished to live as a private individual, would no longer
meddle with public affairs, and had determined not to embroil those of
France. He would, most assuredly, not have adopted this plan had he
suspected the unworthy treatment which was preparing for him, as every
body will readily feel convinced. His letter to the Prince Regent fully
explains his confidence and persuasion on the subject. Captain Maitland,
to whom it was officially communicated before the Emperor embarked on
board his ship, having made no remarks on the above document, had, by
this circumstance alone, recognized and sanctioned the sentiments it
contained.

23rd.—Saw Ushant at four in the morning, having passed it in the night.
From the moment of approaching the Channel, ships of the line and
frigates were seen sailing in various directions. The coast of England
was discovered towards evening.

24th.—We anchored at Torbay about eight in the morning; the Emperor had
risen at six, and went on the poop, whence he surveyed the coast and
anchorage. I remained by his side to give the explanations which he
required.

Captain Maitland immediately despatched a messenger to Lord Keith, the
Commander-in-chief at Plymouth. General Gourgaud rejoined us: he had
been obliged to give up the letter for the Prince Regent; he had not
only been refused permission to land, but prohibited from all
communication. This was a bad omen, and the first indication of those
numberless tribulations which followed.

No sooner had it transpired that the Emperor was on board the
Bellerophon, than the bay was covered with vessels and boats full of
people. The owner of a beautiful country-seat in sight of the ship sent
his Majesty a present of various kinds of fruits.

25th.—The concourse of boats and crowds of spectators continued without
intermission. The Emperor saw them from the cabin windows and
occasionally shewed himself on deck. On returning from the shore,
Captain Maitland handed me a letter from Lady C., enclosing another from
my wife. My surprise was extreme, and not less than my satisfaction; but
the former ceased when I reflected that the length of the passage had
given the French papers time to transmit an account of what had occurred
to a considerable distance, so that whatever related to the Emperor and
his suite was already known in England, where we had even been expected
for five or six days before. My wife hastened to address Lady C. on the
subject, and the latter wrote to Captain Maitland, to whom she enclosed
my letters, without knowing him.

My wife’s letter bespoke feelings of tender affliction; but that of Lady
C., who, from being in London, had learned our future destiny, was full
of reproaches—“I was not my own master, thus to dispose of myself; it
was a crime to abandon my wife and children,” &c. Melancholy result of
our modern systems of education, which tend so little to elevate our
minds that we cannot conceive either the merit or charm of heroic
resolutions and sacrifices! We think that all has been said, and every
plea justified, when the danger of private interests and domestic
enjoyments is put forward,—little imagining that the first duty towards
a wife is to place her in a situation of honour, and that the richest
inheritance we can leave our children is the example of some virtues,
and a name to which a little true glory is attached.

26th.—Orders had arrived in the night for the ship to repair immediately
to Plymouth: having sailed at an early hour, we reached our new
destination at four o’clock in the afternoon, ten days after our
departure from Rochefort, twenty-seven after quitting Paris, and
thirty-five from the Emperor’s abdication. Our horizon became greatly
overcast from this day. Armed boats were placed round the ship; those
whom curiosity had attracted were driven away, even by firing musquetry
at them. Lord Keith, who was in the bay, did not come on board. Two
frigates made the signal for sailing immediately; we were told that a
courier extraordinary had brought dispatches for a distant quarter. In
the morning, some of our party were distributed amongst other vessels.
Every visage seemed now to look at us with a sullen interest; the most
sinister reports had reached the ship; several destinations were
mentioned, each more frightful than the other.

Imprisonment in the Tower of London was the least terrific, and some
spoke of St. Helena. Meanwhile the two frigates, which had greatly
excited my attention, got under weigh, though the wind was contrary for
leaving the roadstead, stood towards us, and anchored on each side,
nearly touching the Bellerophon. Upon this, some person whispered to me
that these ships were to receive us in the course of the night, and to
sail for St. Helena.

Never can I portray the effect of these terrible words! A cold sweat
overspread my whole frame: it was an unexpected sentence of death!
Unpitying executioners had seized me: I was torn from all that attached
me to life. I extended my arms sorrowfully towards those who were dear
to me, but in vain; my fate was inevitable! This thought, together with
a crowd of others which arose in equal disorder, excited a real tempest
of the mind. It was like the struggle of a soul that sought to disengage
itself from its earthly habitation! It turned my hair grey!——Fortunately
the crisis was short, and, as it happened, the mind came forth
triumphant; so much so, indeed, that from this moment I seemed above the
world. I felt that I could thenceforth defy injustice, ill treatment,
and sufferings. Above all, I vowed that neither complaints nor
solicitations should escape me. But let not those of my companions, to
whom I appeared tranquil in those fatal circumstances, accuse me of
being deficient in feeling! Their agony was prolonged in detail—mine
operated all at once.

One of those coincidences, not the least extraordinary of my life,
recurred to my thoughts soon after. Twenty years before, and during my
emigration to England, without possessing any worldly goods, I had
refused to seek a certain fortune in India, because it was too remote,
and I thought myself too old. Now, when twenty years older, I was about
to quit my family, friends, fortune, and enjoyments, to become a
voluntary exile two thousand miles off, in the midst of the ocean, _for
nothing_. But no, I am mistaken! the sentiment that now impelled me was
infinitely superior to the riches I then disdained: I accompanied him
who had governed the world, and will occupy the attention of posterity.

The Emperor continued to appear on deck as usual. I sometimes saw him in
his cabin, but without communicating what I had heard: I wished to
console him, and not to be his tormentor. The reports had, however,
reached him: but he had come so freely and confidently on board the
Bellerophon; he had been so strongly invited by the English themselves;
he so completely regarded his letter to the Prince Regent, transmitted
before-hand to Captain Maitland, as so many tacit conditions; he had, in
fact, acted with such magnanimity throughout the proceeding, that he
repelled with indignation all the fears which were attempted to be
excited in him, not even permitting those around him to entertain
doubts.

27th—28th. It would be difficult to describe our torments and anxiety at
this moment: most of us were dumb and inanimate. The least circumstance
which transpired from the shore—an opinion, however unimportant,
expressed on board—an unmeaning paragraph in a daily paper, became the
subjects of our most serious arguments, and the cause of perpetual
oscillations between our hopes and fears. The most trifling reports were
sought with avidity; whoever appeared was urged to give a favourable
version of deceitful anticipations: so little do the ardour and activity
of our national character contribute to endow us with that stoical
resignation, that imperturbable composure, which can only be acquired
from settled principles and positive doctrines imbibed from early
infancy.

The public papers, particularly those of the ministerial side, were let
loose against us; it was the outcry of the Ministers preparing the blow
they were about to strike. It would not be easy to form an idea of the
horrors, falsehoods, and imprecations accumulated on our heads; and
there is always a portion communicated to the multitude, however well
disposed it may be, so that the demeanour of those around us became less
easy, while their politeness became embarrassed and their countenances
more reserved.

Lord Keith, after announcing himself for some time before, had only just
made his appearance. It was evident that our company was shunned, our
conversation avoided. The papers contained an account of the measures
which were about to be taken; but, as nothing official had appeared, and
there was some contradiction in the details, we were induced to flatter
ourselves as to the final result: thus remaining in that state of
suspense and uncertainty which is worse than a knowledge of the most
painful truths. Nevertheless, our arrival in England had produced a
singular sensation: the presence of the Emperor excited a curiosity
bordering on delirium. It was the papers themselves that informed us of
the circumstance, while they condemned it. All England seemed to hurry
towards Plymouth. A person who had left London, on hearing of my
arrival, was obliged to stop on the road for want of post-horses and
accommodation. The Sound was covered with an immense number of boats;
for some of which, as we heard, above fifty pounds had been paid.

The Emperor, to whom I read all the newspapers, did not betray any
decrease of composure either by his conversation or general habits. It
was known that he always appeared on deck towards five o’clock. A short
time before this hour, all the boats collected alongside of each other;
there were thousands; and so closely connected that the water could no
longer be seen between them; they looked more like a multitude assembled
in a public square than any thing else. When the Emperor came out, the
noise and gestures of so many people presented a most striking
spectacle: it was, at the same time, very easy to perceive that nothing
hostile was meant, and that if curiosity had brought them, they felt
interested on going away; we could even see that the latter sentiment
continued to increase;—at first people merely looked towards the ship,
they ended by saluting; some remained uncovered, and occasionally went
so far as to cheer. Even our symbols began to appear amongst them.
Several persons of both sexes came decorated with red carnations, but
this was only turned to our detriment in the eyes of the Ministry and
its partisans, so that it rendered our agony more poignant.

It was under these circumstances that the Emperor, who, notwithstanding
his calm demeanor, could not help being struck by what he heard,
dictated a paper to me, worthy of serving as a model to jurists,
discussing and defending his real political situation; we found means of
conveying it on shore, but I have kept no copy.

                         MINISTERIAL DECISION.

29th—30th. A report had circulated, during the two previous days, that
an under-secretary of state coming from London to notify the resolutions
of the Ministers with respect to the Emperor, officially. Accordingly he
appeared; it was Sir Charles Bunbury: he came on board, accompanied by
Lord Keith, and delivered a dispatch ordering the removal of the Emperor
to St. Helena, and limiting the number of persons who were to accompany
Napoleon to three, excluding, however, the Duke de Rovigo and General
Lallemand, comprised in the list of proscribed.

I was not called before the Emperor. The bearers of his sentence spoke
and understood French; they were admitted alone. I have since heard that
he objected and protested, with no less energy than logic, against the
violence exercised on his person. “He was the guest of England,” said
he, “and not her prisoner; he came of his own accord to place himself
under the protection of her laws; the most sacred rights of hospitality
were violated in his person; he would never submit voluntarily to the
outrage with which they threatened him; violence alone should oblige him
to do so, &c.”

The Emperor gave me the ministerial document to translate for him, of
which the following is a copy:

             COMMUNICATION MADE BY LORD KEITH, IN THE NAME
                       OF THE ENGLISH MINISTERS.

“As it may, perhaps, be convenient for General Buonaparte to learn,
without farther delay, the intentions of the British Government with
regard to him, your Lordship will communicate the following information:

“It would be inconsistent with our duty towards our country and the
allies of his Majesty, if General Buonaparte possessed the means of
again disturbing the repose of Europe. It is on this account that it
becomes absolutely necessary he should be restrained in his personal
liberty, so far as this is required by the foregoing important object.

“The island of St. Helena has been chosen as his future residence; its
climate is healthy, and its local position will allow of his being
treated with more indulgence than could be admitted in any other spot,
owing to the indispensable precautions which it would be necessary to
employ for the security of his person.

“General Buonaparte is allowed to select amongst those persons who
accompanied him to England (with the exception of Generals Savary and
Lallemand) three officers, who, together with his surgeon, will have
permission to accompany him to St. Helena; these individuals will not be
allowed to quit the island without the sanction of the British
Government.

“Rear-Admiral Sir George Cockburn, who is named Commander-in-chief at
the Cape of Good Hope and seas adjacent, will convey General Buonaparte
and his suite to St. Helena; and he will receive detailed instructions
relative to the execution of this service.

“Sir G. Cockburn will, most probably, be ready to sail in a few days;
for which reason it is desirable that General Buonaparte should make
choice of the persons who are to accompany him without delay.”

                                -------

Although we expected our transportation to St. Helena, we were deeply
affected by its announcement: it threw us all into a state of
consternation. The Emperor did not, however, fail to appear on deck as
usual, with the same countenance; and, as before, calmly surveyed the
crowds which seemed so eager to see him.

31st.—Our situation had now become truly frightful; our sufferings
beyond every power of description; our existence was about to cease with
regard to Europe, our country, families, and friends, as well as our
enjoyments and habits. It is true, we were not forced to follow the
Emperor; but our choice was that of martyrs; the question was a
renunciation of faith, or death. Another circumstance was added, which
greatly increased our torments; this was the exclusion of Generals
Savary and Lallemand, whom it struck with the utmost terror; they saw
nothing but a scaffold before them, and felt persuaded that the
Ministers of England, making no distinction between the political acts
of a revolution, and crimes committed in a moment of tranquillity, would
give them up to their enemies to be sacrificed. This would have been
such an outrage on all law, such an opprobrium for England herself, that
one might have been almost tempted to dare her to it: but it was only
for those who were included in the same proscription to talk thus. At
all events, we did not hesitate to desire that each of us might be
amongst those whom the Emperor would choose; entertaining but one fear,
that of finding ourselves excluded.

August 1st.—We still continued in the same state. I received a letter
from London, in which it was strongly urged that I should be extremely
wrong, nay that it would even be a crime to expatriate myself. The
person who thus wrote also addressed Captain Maitland, begging he would
assist by his efforts and counsel to dissuade me from such a resolution.
But I stopped him short, by observing that, at my age, people generally
acted on reflection.

I read the papers every day to the Emperor. Whether influenced by
generosity, or that opinions began to be divided, there were two amongst
the number that pleaded our cause with great warmth, compensating in
some measure for the gross falsehoods and scurrilous abuse with which
the others were filled. We gave ourselves up to the hope that the hatred
inspired by an enemy would be succeeded by the interest which splendid
actions ought naturally to excite; that England abounded in noble hearts
and elevated minds, which would indubitably become our ardent advocates.

The number of boats increased daily. Napoleon continued to appear at his
usual hour, and the reception became more and more flattering.

Numbers of every rank and condition had followed the Emperor; he was
still, with regard to most of us, as if at the Tuileries; the Grand
Marshal and Duke de Rovigo alone saw him habitually. Some had not
approached or spoken to him more frequently than if we had been at
Paris. I was called during the day, whenever there were any papers or
letters to translate, until the Emperor insensibly contracted the habit
of sending for me every evening towards eight o’clock, to converse with
him a short time.

In the conversation of this evening, and after touching on various other
subjects, he asked me whether I would accompany him to St. Helena. I
replied with the greatest frankness, rendered more easy by my real
sentiments, observing to his Majesty that, in quitting Paris, I had
disregarded every chance; and that therefore St. Helena had nothing
which could make it an exception. There were, however, a great many of
us round his person, while only three were permitted to go out. As some
people considered it a crime in me to leave my family, it was necessary
with regard to the latter, and my own conscience, to know that I could
be useful and agreeable to him—that, in fact, I required to be chosen;
but that this last observation did not spring from any concealed motive,
for my life was henceforth at his disposal without any restriction.

While thus engaged, Madame Bertrand, without having been called, and
even without announcing her name, rushed into the cabin, and in a
frantic manner, entreated the Emperor not to go to St. Helena, nor take
her husband with him. But observing the astonishment, coolness, and calm
answer of Napoleon, she ran out as precipitately as she had entered. The
Emperor, still surprised, turned to me and said, “Can you comprehend all
this? Is she not mad?” A moment afterwards loud shrieks were heard, and
every body seemed to be running towards the stern of the ship. Being
desired to ring the bell, and to enquire the cause, I found that Madame
Bertrand, on leaving the cabin, had attempted to throw herself into the
sea, and was prevented with the greatest difficulty. From this scene it
is easy to judge of our feelings!

                    REMARKABLE WORDS OF THE EMPEROR.

2d-3d. In the morning the Duke de Rovigo told me I was certainly to
depart for St. Helena: while in conversation with the Emperor, a short
time before, his Majesty had said to him that, if there were only two to
accompany him, I should still be one of the number, as he thought I
could afford him some consolation. I am indebted to the candour and
kindness of the Duke for the satisfaction of being made acquainted with
this flattering assurance, and am truly grateful, as, but for him, it
would never have been known to me. The Emperor had not said a word in
reply to my answer; this was his custom, as I shall have other
opportunities of shewing.

I had no particular acquaintance with any of those who had followed the
Emperor, excepting General and and Madame Bertrand, who had shewn me
great attention during my mission to Illyria, where he was
Governor-General. I had until then never spoken to the Duke de Rovigo,
certain prepossessions having induced me to keep at a distance; we had,
however, scarcely exchanged a few words, when my scruples were
completely removed. Savary was sincerely attached to the Emperor; I knew
he possessed warmth of heart, sincerity, and uprightness of character,
qualities which rendered him susceptible of real friendship; we should,
therefore, I dare say, have become very intimate.

I was again sent for by the Emperor; who, after alluding to different
subjects, began to speak of St. Helena, asking me what sort of a place
it could be; whether it was possible to exist there? and similar
questions. “But,” said he, “after all, is it quite certain that I shall
go there? Is a man dependent on others, when he wishes that his
dependence should cease?”—We continued to walk to and fro in the cabin;
he seemed calm, though affected, and somewhat absent.

“My friend,” continued the Emperor, “I have sometimes an idea of
quitting you, and this would not be very difficult; it is only necessary
to create a little mental excitement, and I shall soon have escaped.—All
will be over, and you can then quietly rejoin your families. This is the
more easy, since my internal principles do not oppose any bar to it:—I
am one of those who conceive that the pains of the other world were only
imagined as a counterpoise to those inadequate allurements which are
offered to us there. God can never have willed such a contradiction to
his infinite goodness, especially for an act of this kind; and what is
it after all, but wishing to return to him a little sooner?”

I remonstrated warmly against such notions. Poets and philosophers had
said that it was a spectacle worthy of the Divinity, to see men
struggling with fortune: reverses and constancy had their glory. Such a
great and noble character as his could not descend to the level of
vulgar minds; he who had governed us with so much glory, who had excited
the admiration, and influenced the destinies, of the world, could not
end like a desperate gamester or a disappointed lover. What would then
become of all those who looked up to and placed their hopes in him?
Would he thus abandon the field to his enemies? The anxiety shewn by the
latter to drive him to it was surely sufficient to make him resist: who
could tell the secrets of time, or dare assert what the future would
produce? What might not happen from the mere change of a ministry, the
death of a Prince, that of a confidant, the slightest passion, or the
most trifling dispute?

“Some of these suggestions have their weight,” said the Emperor, “but
what can we do in that desolate place?”—“Sire,” I replied, “we will live
on the past: there is enough in it to satisfy us. Do we not enjoy the
life of Cæsar and that of Alexander? We shall possess still more, you
will re-peruse yourself, Sire!” “Be it so!” rejoined Napoleon; “we will
write our Memoirs. Yes, we must be employed; for occupation is the
scythe of Time. After all, a man ought to fulfil his destinies; this is
my grand doctrine:[8] let mine also be accomplished.” Re-assuming from
this instant an air of ease and even gaiety, he passed on to subjects
totally unconnected with our situation.

Footnote 8:

  The following is a document which the above circumstance contributes
  to render still more precious: it is an order of the day, issued by
  the First Consul to his guard, against suicide.

                   _Order of the 22d Floreal, Year X._

  “The Grenadier Gobain has committed suicide from love: he was in other
  respects an excellent soldier. This is the second incident of the same
  nature that has occurred in the corps within a month.

  “The first Consul directs it to be inserted in the order-book of the
  Guard:—

  “That a soldier ought to know how to vanquish the pangs and melancholy
  of the passions; that there is as much true courage in bearing up
  against mental sufferings with constancy, as in remaining firm on the
  wall of a battery.

  “To give ourselves up to grief without resistance, or to kill
  ourselves to escape affliction, is to abandon the field of battle
  before the victory is gained.”

     DEPARTURE FROM PLYMOUTH.—CONTINUANCE IN THE CHANNEL.—PROTEST.

4th.—Orders had arrived during the night for us to sail at an early
hour; we set sail, which circumstance puzzled us much. The newspapers,
official communications, and private conversations, told us we were to
be conveyed to St. Helena by the Northumberland: we knew that this ship
was still fitting out at Portsmouth or Chatham, so that we might still
calculate on eight or ten days’ delay. The Bellerophon was too old for
the voyage, she had not provisions enough; moreover the wind was
contrary; when therefore we saw the ship returning up Channel, our
uncertainty and conjectures were renewed, but whatever these might be,
every thing was welcome when compared to the idea of transportation to
St. Helena.

Nevertheless, it occurred to us that, in such a decisive moment, the
Emperor was bound to shew a formal opposition to this violence; as to
Napoleon himself, he attached but little importance to it, nor would he
trouble himself about the matter. However, said we, it will be a weapon
in the hands of our friends, and leave causes of remembrance as well as
grounds of defence with the public. I ventured, therefore, to read a
paper I had prepared to his Majesty, with the general sense of which he
seemed pleased; after suppressing a few phrases, and correcting others,
it was signed and sent to Lord Keith. The following is a literal copy of
this document.

                                PROTEST.

“I hereby solemnly protest in the face of heaven and mankind, against
the violence that is done me; and the violation of my most sacred
rights, in forcibly disposing of my person and liberty. I voluntarily
came on board the Bellerophon—I am not the prisoner, I am the guest of
England. I came at the instigation of the Captain himself, who said he
had orders from the Government to receive and convey me to England,
together with my suite, if agreeable to me. I came forward with
confidence to place myself under the protection of the laws of England.
When once on board the Bellerophon, I was entitled to the hospitality of
the British people. If the Government, in giving the Captain of the
Bellerophon orders to receive me and my followers, only wished to lay a
snare, it has forfeited its honour and disgraced its flag.

“If this act be consummated it will be in vain for the English
henceforth to talk of their sincerity, their laws, and liberties.
British faith will have been lost in the hospitality of the Bellerophon.

“I appeal to history: it will say that an enemy who made war for twenty
years against the English people came spontaneously, in the hour of
misfortune, to seek an asylum under their laws. What more striking proof
could he give of his esteem and confidence? But how did England reply to
such an act of magnanimity? It pretended to hold out a hospitable hand
to this enemy; and, on giving himself up with confidence, he was
immolated!

                                           (Signed)      “NAPOLEON.”

  _Bellerophon at Sea,_ _Friday, Aug._ 4th, 1815.

The Duke de Rovigo told me that the Emperor had demanded permission to
send me to the Prince Regent at London, but that it was obstinately
refused.

The sea was rough, and the wind blew with violence. Most of us were
affected with sea-sickness. But what cannot the pre-occupation of the
mind effect over physical infirmities! This was perhaps the only time in
my life that I was not incommoded by such weather. On leaving Plymouth
Sound, we stood to the eastward before the wind, but were soon after
close-hauled, tacking backwards and forwards, without being able to
comprehend the cause of this new source of torment.

5th.—The whole of this day was passed in the same manner. While
conversing with the Emperor in the evening he gave me two proofs of
confidence, but I cannot now confide them to paper.[9]

Footnote 9:

  There is, however, one of these proofs which I am now at liberty to
  disclose. While walking in the stern-gallery with the Emperor, at the
  usual hour, he drew from under his waistcoat, still conversing on a
  totally different subject, a species of girdle, which he handed to me,
  saying, “Take care of that for me;” without interrupting him, I placed
  it under my own waistcoat. The Emperor told me, soon after, that it
  contained a diamond necklace, worth two hundred thousand francs, which
  Queen Hortensia forced him to accept on his leaving Malmaison. After
  our arrival at St. Helena I frequently spoke of returning the
  necklace, but never received any reply. Having ventured to mention the
  subject again when we were at Longwood, Napoleon drily asked, “Does it
  annoy you?”—“No, Sire,” was my answer;—“Keep it then,” said he. From
  wearing the girdle so long, the necklace became as it were identified
  with my person; and I thought so little about it that it was not till
  some days after my being torn from Longwood, and by the merest
  accident, it recurred to my memory; when I shuddered at the idea of
  depriving the Emperor of such a resource. For how would it be possible
  now to make restitution? I was in the most rigorous confinement,
  surrounded by gaolers and sentinels, so that all communication was
  impracticable. I vainly endeavoured to contrive a plan; time pressed;
  only a few days were left, and nothing could be more distressing than
  thus to quit the island. In this predicament, I resolved to run all
  risks. An Englishman, to whom I had often spoken, came to the prison
  on a particular errand—and it was under the eyes of the Governor
  himself, or one of his most confidential agents whom he brought, that
  I ventured to communicate my wishes.

  “I think you are a man of principle,” said I, “and I am going to put
  it to the test;—though with nothing injurious or contrary to your
  honour—merely a rich deposit to be restored to Napoleon. If you accept
  the charge, my son will put it into your pocket.”

  He answered only by slackening his pace; my son, whom I had prepared
  for the scene, followed him, and the necklace was transferred into
  this man’s possession, almost in sight of the military attendants.
  Before quitting the island, I had the inexpressible satisfaction of
  knowing that the necklace had reached the hands of the Emperor. How
  gratifying to the heart are the recollection and recital of such a
  trait on the part of an enemy, and under such circumstances!

  ANCHORED OFF START POINT.—PERSONS ALLOWED TO ACCOMPANY THE EMPEROR.

6th.—We anchored about noon off Start Point, where there was no shelter
whatever, though we had but a very short distance to go in order to
anchor in Torbay: this circumstance excited great astonishment on our
part. We had, however, heard that orders were given to meet the
Northumberland, the departure of which vessel from Portsmouth was urged
with all possible haste. Accordingly that ship soon appeared with two
frigates full of troops, which were to compose the garrison of St.
Helena. These three ships anchored close to us; after which the
communications amongst the whole squadron became very active. The
precautions to prevent the approach of boats were still continued.
Meanwhile the mystery of our precipitate sailing from Plymouth, and all
the manœuvring that followed, was discovered. Lord Keith had, we were
told, received notice, by telegraph, that a public officer had just left
London with a writ of _habeas corpus_, to claim the person of the
Emperor in the name of the laws or of some competent tribunal. We could
neither ascertain the motives nor details of this circumstance: the
Admiral, it was added, had scarcely time enough to escape this
difficulty; we heard that he was suddenly obliged to go on board a brig,
and quit Plymouth Sound. This was the motive which kept us out of
Torbay.

Admirals Keith and Cockburn came on board the Bellerophon; the flag of
the latter was flying on board the Northumberland: they had a conference
with the Emperor, to whom they delivered an extract from the
instructions relative to our transportation to and stay at St. Helena.
These stated that all our effects were to be examined, for the purpose
of taking away the money, bills, and diamonds, belonging to the Emperor,
as well as ourselves, to be kept for us: we also heard that our arms
would be taken from us at the same time, and that we were then to be
transferred to the Northumberland. The documents were as follow:

               ORDER FROM LORD KEITH TO CAPTAIN MAITLAND
                          OF THE BELLEROPHON.

“All arms of every description are to be taken from the French, of
whatever rank, who are on board his Majesty’s ship under your command.
These arms will be carefully packed, and are to remain in your charge so
long as the persons to whom they belong continue on board the
Bellerophon. They will then be under the charge of the captain of the
ship to which the said individuals may be transferred.”

      _Start Bay, August 6th, 1815._

             INSTRUCTIONS OF MINISTERS TO ADMIRAL COCKBURN.

“When General Buonaparte leaves the Bellerophon to go on board the
Northumberland, it will be the properest moment for Admiral Cockburn to
have the effects examined which General Buonaparte may have brought with
him. The Admiral will allow the baggage, wines, (_the wines!_ an
observation truly worthy of the English Ministers,) and provisions which
the General may have brought with him, to be taken on board the
Northumberland. Among the baggage his table-service shall be understood
as included, unless it be so considerable as to seem rather an article
to be converted into ready money than for real use. His money, his
diamonds, and his saleable effects (consequently bills of exchange
also), of whatever kind they may be, must be delivered up. The Admiral
will declare to the General that the British Government by no means
intends to confiscate his property, but merely to take upon itself the
administration of his effects, to hinder him from using them as a means
to promote his escape.

“The examination shall be made in the presence of a person named by
General Buonaparte, the inventory of the effects to be retained shall be
signed by this person as well as by the Rear-admiral, or by the person
whom we shall appoint to draw up the inventory. The interest or the
principal (according as his property is more or less considerable) shall
be applied to his support, and in this respect the principal arrangement
is to be left to him. For this purpose he can from time to time signify
his wishes to the Admiral, till the arrival of the new Governor of St.
Helena, and afterwards to the latter; and, if no objection is made to
his proposal, the Admiral or the Governor can give the necessary orders,
and the disbursement will be paid by bills on his Majesty’s Treasury. In
case of death, (_what foresight!_) he can dispose of his property by a
last Will, and may be assured that the contents of his testament shall
be faithfully executed. As an attempt might be made to make a part of
his property pass for the property of the persons of his suite, it must
be signified that the property of his attendants is subject to the same
regulations.

“The Admiral is not to take any person on board for St. Helena, without
the consent of such person, to whom he is previously to explain the
necessity of being subjected to all the regulations which it may be
thought proper to establish for securing the person of the General. It
must be made known to the General that, if he make any attempt to
escape, he will expose himself to close imprisonment; and that any of
his suite who may be discovered in endeavouring to facilitate his escape
will incur the same punishment. (Afterwards the Act of Parliament made
the latter offence death.)

“All letters which shall be addressed to him, or to any of his suite,
are to be delivered in the first place to the Admiral or the Governor,
who is to read them previously to transmitting them: the same regulation
is to be observed with respect to letters written by the General, or
those of his suite.

“The General is to be informed that the Governor and the Admiral have
received positive orders to forward to his Majesty’s Government any
request or representation he may think proper to make: nothing is left
to their discretion on this point; but the paper on which such
representations shall be written is to remain open, in order that they
may subjoin such observations as they may think expedient.”

                                -------

It would not be easy to conceive the intensity and nature of our
feelings at this decisive moment, in which outrage, violence, and
injustice, were accumulated on our heads.

Constrained to reduce his suite to three persons, the Emperor selected
the Grand Marshal, M. de Montholon and myself. Gourgaud, in despair at
the idea of being left behind, entered into a negotiation on the
subject, and succeeded. As the instructions only allowed Napoleon to
take three officers, it was agreed that I should be considered purely in
a civil capacity, and to admit a fourth by the aid of this
interpretation.

CONVERSATION WITH LORD KEITH.—EXAMINATION OF THE EMPEROR’S EFFECTS.—HE
  QUITS THE BELLEROPHON.—SEPARATION.—WE SAIL FOR ST. HELENA.

7th.—The Emperor addressed to Lord Keith a species of new protest,
against the violence done to his person in forcibly removing him from
the Bellerophon. I took it on board the Tonnant. Admiral Keith, a
fine-looking old man, of highly polished manners, received me with great
politeness, but he carefully avoided touching on the subject of the
protest, observing that he would give an answer in writing.

This did not stop me. I stated the situation of Napoleon, who was very
unwell, his legs being much swelled; and pointed out to his lordship how
desirable it was for the Emperor not to be sent off so suddenly. He
replied that I had been a sailor, and must therefore see that the
anchorage was unsafe, which was certainly true.

I explained the Emperor’s repugnance to have his effects searched and
tossed about, as proposed; assuring him that Napoleon would infinitely
prefer seeing them thrown into the sea. The Admiral answered that as
this was a positive order, he must obey it. Finally I enquired whether
it was probable that those appointed to search would go so far as to
deprive the Emperor of his sword. He said that it would be respected,
but that Napoleon was the only person exempted, as all his followers
would be disarmed. I shewed him that I was already so: my sword having
been taken from me before I left the Bellerophon. A secretary who was
writing near us, observed to Lord Keith, in English, that the order
stated that Napoleon himself was to be disarmed; upon which the Admiral
drily replied, also in English, as well as I could comprehend, “Mind
your own business, Sir, and leave us to ours.”

Still continuing the conversation, I went over all that had occurred
from the commencement. I had been the negotiator, I said, and ought
therefore to feel most acutely; and had the greater right to be heard.
Lord Keith listened to me with marked impatience; we were standing, and
his frequent bows were evidently intended to make me retire. When I told
him that Captain Maitland said he had been authorised to bring us to
England, without exciting a suspicion in our minds that we were to be
prisoners of war; that the Captain could not deny that we came on board
voluntarily and in confidence; that the letter of the Emperor to the
Prince of Wales, which I had previously communicated to Captain
Maitland, must necessarily have created tacit conditions, since he made
no remarks on it: at length the Admiral’s ill-humour and even anger
broke forth, and he replied sharply, that if such were the case, Captain
Maitland must have been a fool, for his instructions contained nothing
of the kind; and he was quite sure of this, for it was from himself they
had emanated. “But, my Lord,” said I, “permit me to observe, in defence
of Captain Maitland, that your Lordship speaks with a degree of severity
for which you may become responsible; for not only Captain Maitland, but
Admiral Hotham and all the other officers whom we saw at the time,
conducted and expressed themselves in the same way towards us; would it
have been thus, if their instructions had been so clear and positive?”
Saying this, I relieved the Admiral of my presence: he made no attempt
to prolong a subject which, perhaps, his Lordship’s conscience rendered
somewhat painful to him.

Admiral Cockburn, aided by an officer of the customs, examined the
effects of the Emperor: they seized four thousand Napoleons, and left
fifteen hundred to pay the servants: this was all the Emperor’s
treasure. They were assisted, or rather impeded, in the operation by
Marchand, the valet-de-chambre of his Majesty: this appeared to mortify
the Admiral excessively; though requested to attend, not one amongst us
would lend his presence to, or witness, an act which we regarded as
being at once mean and insulting.

Meanwhile, the moment of quitting the Bellerophon arrived. The Grand
Marshal had been some time closeted with the Emperor; during which we
remained in the outer cabin: on the door being opened, the Duke de
Rovigo, bursting into tears, threw himself at the feet of Napoleon, and
kissed his hands. The Emperor, still calm and collected, embraced the
Duke, and continued his way towards the accommodation-ladder, graciously
saluting all those who happened to be on the quarter-deck. The whole of
our party whom we left behind were in a state of the deepest anguish;
nor could I help observing to Lord Keith, who stood near me at the time,
“You see, my Lord, that the only persons who shed tears are those who
are to remain.”

We reached the Northumberland between one and two o’clock. The Emperor
remained on deck conversing familiarly and cheerfully with those of the
English who approached him. Lord Lowther and a Mr. Littleton had a long
conversation with him on politics and government. I heard nothing of
what passed; the Emperor seemed desirous that we should leave him to
himself. I employed this moment of leisure in writing a last adieu to my
wife and friends: indeed, I felt very unwell and much fatigued.

At the moment of getting under weigh, a cutter, that was plying round
the ship to keep off the people, ran down a boat full of spectators
close to us. Fatality seems to have brought them from a great distance
to become the victims of this accident: I understood that there were two
women amongst those who perished. Thus were we at length under sail for
St. Helena, thirteen days after our arrival at Plymouth, and forty from
our quitting Paris.

Those of the attendants whom Napoleon was not allowed to take with him
were the last to quit the ship, bearing with them mingled proofs of
satisfaction and regret. Their departure gave rise to a second scene,
not less affecting than the first. The Emperor retired to the cabin
allotted to him about seven o’clock.

The English Ministry warmly censured the respect which had been shewn to
the Emperor on board the Bellerophon, and issued fresh orders in
consequence; so that a totally different style of manner and expression
was affected in the Northumberland. The crew seemed to betray a
ridiculous anxiety to be covered before the Emperor: it had been
strictly enjoined to give him no other title than that of _General_, and
only to treat him as such. This was the ingenious contrivance, the happy
conception, engendered by the diplomacy of the English Ministers; and
the title they thought proper to confer on him whom they had recognised
as First Consul, whom they had so often styled head of the French
Government, with whom they treated as Emperor at Paris, when Lord
Lauderdale was employed to negotiate, and, perhaps, even signed articles
at Chatillon. Hence, in a moment of warmth, the Emperor, in allusion to
this regulation, observed: “They may call me whatever they choose, but
they cannot prevent me from being _myself_.” It was in fact no less
whimsical than ridiculous to see the Ministers of England attach such
importance to giving only the title of General to one who had governed
so large a portion of Europe, and made seven or eight kings, of whom
several still retained this title of his creation; who had been above
ten years Emperor of the French, and been anointed as well as
consecrated in that quality by the head of the Church; one who could
boast two or three elections of the French people to the sovereignty;
who had been acknowledged as Emperor by the whole of continental Europe;
had treated as such with all the sovereigns; concluding every species of
alliance both of blood and interest with them: so that he united in his
person every title, civil, political and religious, existing amongst
men: and which, by a singular though real coincidence, not one of the
reigning Princes of Europe could have shewn accumulated in an equal
degree, on the chief and founder of his dynasty. Nevertheless his
Majesty, who intended, had he landed in England, to assume the name and
title of Colonel Duroc or Muiron, no longer thought of it now that his
legitimate titles were obstinately disputed.

    DESCRIPTION OF THE EMPEROR’S CABIN ON BOARD THE NORTHUMBERLAND.

8th-9th. The ship was in the greatest confusion, and seemed to be quite
encumbered with men as well as stores and luggage: we sailed in so great
a hurry that there was scarcely any thing on board in its place, so that
the whole crew was now occupied in restoring order, and preparing for
the voyage.

The following particulars will afford some idea of that part of the ship
occupied by the Emperor and his suite. The space abaft the mizen-mast
contained two public and two private cabins; the first was a dining-room
about ten feet broad, and extending the whole width of the ship, lighted
by a port-hole at each end, and a sky-light above. The drawing-room was
composed of all the remaining space, diminished by two symmetrical
cabins on the right and left, each having an entry from the dining or
mess-room, and another from the drawing-room. The Emperor occupied that
on the left, in which his camp bed-stead had been put up; that on the
right was appropriated to the Admiral. It was, above all, peremptorily
enjoined that the drawing-room should be in common, and not given up to
the Emperor: to such a ridiculous extent had the fears and solicitude of
the Ministry been carried!

The form of the dining-table resembled that of the mess-room. The
Emperor sat with his back to the drawing-room or after-cabin, and
looking towards the head of the ship; on his left sat Madame Bertrand,
and on his right, the Admiral. On the right of the Admiral sat Madame de
Montholon: these filled one side of the table. At the end next that lady
was Captain Ross, who commanded the ship; opposite to whom, at the
corresponding end, sat M. de Montholon, by Madame Bertrand; next to him,
the Admiral’s secretary. The remaining space was the side of the table
opposite to the Emperor, which, beginning from Captain Ross, was
occupied by the Grand Marshal, the General commanding the 53rd regiment,
myself, and Baron Gourgaud.

The Admiral invited one or two of the officers every day, who were
intermixed amongst us at table. I generally sat almost opposite to the
Emperor. The band of the 53d, which had been recently formed, exercised
during dinner at the expense of our ears. We had two courses, but there
was a want of provisions; our tastes were, besides, very different from
those of our hosts. It is true, they did their utmost; but after all, it
would not do to be difficult. I was lodged with my son on the starboard
side, even with the main-mast, in a small cabin enclosed with canvass,
and having a gun in it. We made as much sail as the wind would permit to
get out of the Channel, and stood along the coast of England,
communicating with all the ports in order to procure additional supplies
of sea-stock, and complete the stores of the ship. A large quantity of
articles was brought to us from Plymouth, off which port we were joined
by several other vessels, as well as from Falmouth.

LOST SIGHT OF LAND.—REFLECTIONS.—ARGUMENT AGAINST THE ENGLISH MINISTERS.

10.—This day we cleared the Channel, and lost sight of land. We had now
entered upon the dreary unknown course to which fate had doomed us.
Again my agonies were renewed; again the dear connexions I had abandoned
resumed their influence over my heart. I indulged in the luxuriance of
grief, and found a miserable satisfaction in its excess. “Objects of all
my affections,” I exclaimed, “friends of my heart, for whom alone I
live, reflect that I am proving myself worthy of you. Let that thought
support you also; and, oh! forget me not.”

Meanwhile we advanced in our course, and were soon to be out of Europe.
Thus, in less than six weeks, had the Emperor abdicated his throne, and
placed himself in the hands of the English, who were now hurrying him to
a barren rock in the midst of a vast ocean! This is certainly no
ordinary instance of the chances of fortune, and no common trial of the
firmness of the mind. Yet will posterity be better able to judge of
these three leading circumstances than we of the present day. They will
have to pronounce on a clear horizon; whereas we are enveloped in
clouds.

Scarcely had Napoleon descended from his throne, when those who
witnessed the misfortunes of the nation, which followed, regarded his
sacrifice as a capital error. When they heard of his being a prisoner at
Plymouth, they censured his magnanimity; there was not a single
incident, even to his suffering himself to be sent to St. Helena, which
they did not make a subject of reproach. But such is the tendency of
vulgar minds: never judging except on what they see at the moment! It
is, however, impossible to judge of one resolution without considering,
not only the evils which unavoidably attend it, but those which a
contrary determination might have produced.

By abdicating, Napoleon rallied all the friends of their country round
one point—that of its safety! He left France demanding, before all
nations, nothing but the sacred rights of national independence; he took
from the Allies every pretext to ravage and dismember our territory; he
destroyed all idea of his personal ambition; terminating his career as
the martyr of a cause of which he had been the hero. If all the
advantages which might have been derived from his genius and talents as
a citizen were not obtained, it is to be imputed to the weakness and
treachery of the transitory Government by which he was succeeded. When
he arrived at Rochefort, and the commander of the frigates refused to
sail, ought he to have abandoned the fruits of his abdication? Should he
have returned to the interior, and placed himself at the head of mere
bands, when he had renounced armies? or, ought he to have desperately
encouraged a civil war which would lead to no beneficial result, but
only serve to ruin the remaining pillars, the future hopes, of the
country? In this state of affairs, he formed a most magnanimous
resolution, worthy of his life, and a complete refutation of the
calumnies that for twenty years had been so ridiculously accumulated on
his head. But what will history say of those Ministers of a liberal
nation, the guardians and depositaries of popular rights—ever ardent in
encouraging a Coriolanus, having only chains for a Camillus?

As to the reproach of suffering himself to be transported to St. Helena,
it would be a disgrace to answer such a charge. To contend with an
adversary in the cabin of a ship—kill some one with his own hand—or
attempt to set fire to the powder-magazine, would have been, at best,
the act of a Buccaneer. Dignity in misfortune, submission to necessity,
have also their glory: it is that which becomes great men overwhelmed by
adversity.

When the English Ministers found themselves in possession of Napoleon’s
person, passion had much more influence over them than justice or
policy. They neglected the triumph of their laws, denied the rights of
hospitality, disregarded their own honour, and compromised that of their
country. They determined to exile their guest in the midst of the ocean,
to keep him prisoner on a rock, two thousand leagues from Europe, and
far from all communion with mankind. It seemed that they wished to trust
to the anguish of exile, the fatigues of a long voyage, privations of
every kind, and the corroding influence of a burning climate, for
effecting that which they feared to perform themselves. In order,
however, to gain over the public voice, to make it appear that their
conduct was indispensably necessary, the newspapers were instigated to
irritate the passions of the multitude, by reviving former calumnies and
falsehoods; while the Ministers, on their side, represented their own
determination as an engagement entered into with their allies. We
presented ourselves at the moment of popular effervescence, just as
every thing which could render us odious had been brought forward. The
public journals were full of the most virulent declamations; maliciously
raking up every act and expression of the previous struggle of twenty
years that could wound the national pride, or rekindle its hatred. Yet,
when all England hurried to the south to see us, during our stay at
Plymouth, the conduct and sentiments of the multitudes who came were
enough to convince us that this factitious irritation would disappear of
itself. Hence we were led to hope, on our departure, that the British
people would daily grow more impartial in a cause to which they were no
longer parties; that the current of public opinion would eventually turn
against Ministers; and that we had thus ensured them formidable attacks
and a terrible responsibility for a future day.

                 THE EMPEROR’S MODE OF LIVING ON BOARD
                          THE NORTHUMBERLAND.

11th—14th. Our course was shaped across the Bay of Biscay, and double
Cape Finisterre. The wind was fair, though light; and the heat
excessive: nothing could be more monotonous than the time we now passed.
The Emperor breakfasted in his own cabin at irregular hours; we took our
breakfast at ten o’clock, in the French style, while the English
continued to breakfast in their own way at eight.

The Emperor sent for one of us every morning to know what was going on,
the distance run, the state of the wind, and other particulars connected
with our progress. He read much, dressed towards four o’clock, and then
came into the general cabin; here he played at chess with one of the
party: at five o’clock the Admiral, having come out of his cabin a few
minutes before, announced that dinner was on the table.

It is well known that Napoleon was scarcely ever more than fifteen
minutes at his dinner; here the two courses alone occupied from an hour
to an hour and a half: this was to him a most serious annoyance, though
he never mentioned it; his features, gestures, and manner, always
evinced perfect indifference. Neither the new system of cookery, the
difference nor quality of the dishes, ever met with his censure or
approbation; he never expressed any wish or objection on the subject. He
was attended by his two valets, who stood behind his chair. At first the
Admiral was in the habit of offering to help the Emperor; but the
acknowledgment of Napoleon was expressed so coldly that this practice
was discontinued. The Admiral continued very attentive, but thenceforth
only pointed out to the servants what was preferable; they alone
attended to these matters, to which the Emperor seemed totally
indifferent, neither seeing, noticing, nor seeking, any thing. He was
generally silent, remaining in the midst of conversation as if totally
unacquainted with the language, though it was French. If he spoke, it
was to ask some technical or scientific question, and to address a few
words to those whom the Admiral occasionally asked to dinner. I was the
person to whom the Emperor generally addressed his questions, in order
to translate them.

I need scarcely observe that the English are accustomed to remain a long
time at table after the dessert, drinking and conversing: the Emperor,
already tired by the tedious dinner, could never have endured this
custom, and he rose, therefore from the first day, immediately after
coffee had been handed round, and went out on deck followed by the Grand
Marshal and myself. This disconcerted the Admiral, who took occasion to
express his surprise to his officers; but Madame Bertrand, whose
maternal language is English, warmly replied—“Do not forget, Admiral,
that your guest is a man who has governed a large portion of the world,
and that kings once contended for the honour of being admitted to his
table.” “Very true,” rejoined the Admiral; and this officer, who
possesses good sense, a becoming pliability of manners, and sometimes
much elegance, did his utmost from that moment to accommodate the
Emperor in his habits. He shortened the time of sitting at table,
ordering coffee for Napoleon and those who accompanied him, even before
the rest of the company had finished their dinner. The moment Napoleon
had taken his coffee, he left the cabin; upon which every body rose till
he had quitted the room, and then continued to take their wine for
another hour.

The Emperor remained walking on deck till dark, attended by the Grand
Marshal and myself. This became a regular practice, and was seldom
omitted. On returning to the after-cabin, he sat down to play
_vingt-et-un_ with us, and generally retired in about half an hour.

                 SINGULAR GOOD FORTUNE OF THE EMPEROR.

15th.—We asked permission to be admitted into the Emperor’s presence
this morning, and all entered his cabin at the same time. He was not
aware of the cause of this visit:—it was his birthday, which seemed to
have altogether escaped his recollection. We had been in the habit of
seeing him on that anniversary, on a much larger stage, and in the midst
of his power, but never were our wishes more sincere, or our hearts more
full of attachment, than on the present occasion.

The days now exactly resembled each other: at night we constantly played
at _vingt-et-un_; the Admiral and some of his officers being
occasionally of the party. The Emperor used to retire after losing,
according to custom his ten or twelve Napoleons; this happened to him
daily, because he would persist in leaving his stake on the table, until
it had produced a considerable number. To-day he had gained from eighty
to a hundred. The Admiral dealt the cards: the Emperor still wished to
leave his winnings, in order to see how far he could reach; but thought
he could perceive it would be quite as agreeable to the Admiral if he
stopped where he was. The Emperor had won sixteen times, and might have
won more than sixty thousand Napoleons. While all present were
expatiating on his being thus singularly favoured by fortune, an English
officer observed that it was the anniversary of his birth-day.

              CONTINUATION OF THE VOYAGE.—OCCUPATIONS.—THE
                EMPEROR’S ORIGIN AND FAMILY.—ANECDOTES.

16th—21st. We doubled Cape Finisterre on the 16th, passed Cape St.
Vincent on the 18th, and were off the Straits of Gibraltar next day.
Continuing our course along the coast of Africa towards Madeira, nothing
worthy of remark occurred, there being a perfect uniformity in our
habits and mode of passing the time; if there was any difference, it
could only arise from the subject of our conversation.

The Emperor usually remained in his cabin during the whole morning: so
excessive was the heat that he only wore a very slight dress. He could
not sleep, and frequently rose in the night. Reading was his chief
occupation. I was sent for almost every morning, and translated from the
“Encyclopædia Britannica,” and such other books as were on board,
whatever they contained relative to St. Helena, or the countries near
which we were sailing. This led to my Historical Atlas being brought
under review. Napoleon had merely glanced at it on board the
Bellerophon, and before that time he had but a very indistinct notion of
the work. I now had the satisfaction of seeing it in the Emperor’s hands
for several days, and of hearing him express the warmest approbation of
my labours. The quantity and arrangement of the matter seemed more
particularly to please him: he had, in fact, hitherto been but little
acquainted with the book. Passing over all the others, his chief
attention was attracted by the geographical charts; more especially the
map of the world, which seemed principally to excite his notice and
applause. I did not attempt to convince him that the geography was the
weakest part of the work, displaying far less labour and research than
other parts; the general tables could not easily be surpassed, either as
to their method, symmetry, or facility for use; while each of the
genealogical tables presented a miniature history of the country they
concerned and of which they were, in all respects, both a complete
analysis and a collection of elementary materials.

The Emperor asked me whether the work had been used in all our systems
of education; adding, that had it been better known to him, all the
schools and lyceums should have been furnished with it. He further
asked, why I had published it under the borrowed name of Le Sage? I
replied that a very imperfect sketch had been published in England, just
after my emigration, at a time when we could not acknowledge our names
as emigrants abroad, without danger to our relations in France; “and,
perhaps,” said I, laughing, “I was not then cured of the prejudices of
my youth; like the nobles of Bretagne, who deposited their swords with
the registrar of the Civil Court, while engaged in trade, that they
might not derogate from their family dignity.”

As already observed, the Emperor always rose from table long before the
rest of the company: the Grand Marshal and I always followed him to the
quarter-deck, where I was frequently left alone with him; as General
Bertrand had often to attend his wife, who suffered excessively from
sea-sickness.

After the preliminary remarks on the weather, the ship’s progress, and
the winds, Napoleon used to start a subject of conversation, or revive
that of the preceding or some other former, day; and when he had taken
eight or nine turns the whole length of the deck, he would seat himself
on the second gun from the gangway on the larboard side. The midshipmen
soon observed this habitual predilection, so that the cannon was
thenceforth called the _Emperor’s gun_.

It was there that Napoleon often conversed for hours together, and that
I learned for the first time a part of what I am about to relate: in
doing which, I wish to observe that I shall at the same time add
whatever I collected in a variety of subsequent conversations; thus
presenting at one view, all that I have heard worth noting on the
subject.

The name of Bonaparte may be spelt either _Bonaparte_ or _Buonaparte_;
as all Italians know. Napoleon’s father always introduced the _u_; and
his uncle, the Archdeacon Lucien (who survived Napoleon’s father and was
a parent to Napoleon and his brothers), at the same time, and under the
same roof, wrote it _Bonaparte_. During his youth, Napoleon followed the
example of his father. On attaining the command of the Army of Italy he
took good care not to alter the orthography, which agreed with the
spirit of the language; but at a later period, and when amongst the
French, he wished to adopt their orthography, and thenceforth wrote his
name Bonaparte.

This family for many years made a distinguished figure in the Bolognese
territory: it was very powerful at Treviso; and is to be found inscribed
in the Golden book of Bologna, as also amongst the patricians of
Florence. When Napoleon, as General in chief of the army of Italy,
entered Treviso, at the head of his victorious army, the principal
inhabitants came to meet him, bringing title deeds and records, which
proved that his family had once been one of the most eminent in their
city.

At the interview of Dresden, before the Russian campaign, the Emperor
Francis one day told Napoleon, then his son-in-law, that his family had
governed as sovereigns at Treviso: a fact of which there could be no
doubt, as Francis had caused all the documents proving it to be drawn up
and presented to him. Napoleon replied, with a smile, that he did not
wish to know anything about it, and that he preferred being the Rodolph
of Hapsburgh of his own family. Francis attached much more importance to
the matter: he said that it was of very little consequence to have
fallen from wealth to poverty; but that it was above all price to have
been of sovereign rank, and that the fact must be communicated to Maria
Louisa, to whom it would afford infinite pleasure.

When, during the campaign of Italy, Napoleon entered Bologna,
Marescalchi, Caprara, and Aldini, since so well known in France, and at
that time deputies in the senate of their native city, came of their own
accord to present the golden book, in which the name and arms of his
ancestors were inscribed.

There are several houses at Florence which attest the former existence
of the Buonaparte family there; many houses are even still seen bearing
the escutcheons of the family.

Cesari, a Corsican or Bolognese, residing in London, who was shocked at
the manner in which the British Government had received Napoleon’s
pacific letter on assuming the Consulate, published a genealogical
notice, wherein he established the Emperor’s alliance with the ancient
house of _Este_, _Welf_, or _Guelf_, supposed to be the parent stem of
the present royal family of England.[10]

Footnote 10:

  This paragraph was in such a state in the manuscript as to excite
  doubts; and I was on the point of suppressing it: I must therefore
  state my reasons for its insertion. What is my object? chiefly to
  leave materials behind me. When I indicate how these were collected,
  and say that I obtained them from a mere conversation—that I may have
  disfigured them in thus suddenly seizing their sense—when I admit
  their probable inaccuracy, and place the reader in the way of
  rectifying my errors—have I not sufficiently fulfilled my object and
  duty?

The Duke de Feltre, French ambassador in Tuscany, brought to Paris, from
the Gallery de Medici, the portrait of a Buonaparte who had married a
princess of the Grand Duke’s family. The mother of Pope Nicholas V. or
Paul V., of Sarzana, was also a Buonaparte.

It was a Buonaparte who negotiated the treaty by which Leghorn was
exchanged for Sarzana. It is to a Buonaparte that we are indebted for
one of the oldest comedies written at the period of the revival of
letters intitled _The Widow_. It may still be seen in the Royal Library
at Paris.[11]

Footnote 11:

  Verified at the Royal Library: the manuscript being really there, and
  the play itself printed.

When Napoleon marched against Rome at the head of the French army, and
received the propositions of the Pope at Tolentino, one of the
negotiators of the enemy observed that he was the only Frenchman who had
marched against Rome since the Constable de Bourbon; but what rendered
this circumstance still more singular was that the history of the first
expedition was written by an ancestor of him who executed the second,
that is to say, Signor Niccolo Buonaparte, who has in reality left us a
work, called _The Sacking of Rome by the Constable de Bourbon_.[12]

Footnote 12:

  Also verified at the Royal Library, where the account of the sacking
  of Rome is deposited, but by _Jacopo Buonaparte_, and not _Niccolo_.
  Jacopo was a contemporary and an eye-witness of the event: his
  manuscript was printed for the first time at Cologne, in 1756; and the
  volume actually contains a genealogy of the Buonapartes, which is
  carried back to a very remote period, and describes them as one of the
  most illustrious houses of Tuscany.

  The above genealogy presents a fact which is certainly of a very
  singular nature: it is that of the first Buonaparte having been exiled
  from his country as a _Ghibeline_. Was it, then, the destiny of his
  family, in all times, and at every epoch, that it must yield to the
  influence of the _Guelfs_!

  The Cologne editor sometimes writes _Buonaparte_, and at others,
  _Bonaparte_.

  This Signor Niccolo Buonaparte, named in the text as the historian, is
  only the uncle; he is, however, mentioned in the genealogy as a very
  distinguished man of letters, and as having founded the class of
  jurisprudence in the University of Pisa.

Hence, perhaps, or from the Pope mentioned above, the name of Niccolo,
which the writers of certain pamphlets pretended to be that of the
Emperor, instead of Napoleon. This work is to be found in most
libraries; it is preceded by a history of the house of Buonaparte,
printed about forty or fifty years ago, and edited by Dr. Vaccha, a
professor of Pisa.

M. de Cetto, ambassador of Bavaria, has often told me that the archives
of Munich contained a great number of documents, in Italian, which
proved the antiquity and importance of the Buonaparte family.

During the continuance of his power, Napoleon always refused to take any
pains, or even to enter into conversation, on the subject. The first
attempt to turn his attention to this matter occurred in the time of his
Consulate, and was so much discouraged that no one ever sought to renew
the discussion. Some person published a genealogy, in which he contrived
to connect the family of Napoleon with certain northern kings. Napoleon
caused this specimen of flattery to be ridiculed in the public papers in
which the writers concluded by observing that the nobility of the First
Consul only dated from _Montenotte_, or from the 18th of Brumaire.

This family suffered, like many others, from the numerous revolutions
which desolated the cities of Italy. The troubles of Florence placed the
Buonapartes amongst the _fuorusciti_, or emigrants. One of the family
retired to Sarzana in the first instance, and thence went to Corsica,
from which island his descendants always continued to send their
children to Tuscany, where they were educated under the care of the
branch that remained at San Miniato. The second sons of this branch had
borne the name of Napoleon for several generations, which was derived
from an ancestor thus named, celebrated in the annals of Italy.

When on his way to Florence, after the expedition to Leghorn, Napoleon
slept at the house of an old Abbé Buonaparte, at San Miniato, who
treated the whole of his staff with great magnificence. Having exhausted
all the family recollections, the Abbé told the young General that he
was going to bring forth the most precious document of all. Napoleon
thought he was about to shew him a fine genealogical tree, well
calculated to gratify his vanity (said he, laughing); but it was a
memorial regularly drawn up in favour of father Buonaventura Buonaparte,
a Capuchin friar of Bologna, long since beatified, but who had not yet
been canonized owing to the enormous expense which it required. “The
Pope will not refuse you,” said the good Abbé, “if you ask him; and
should it be necessary to pay the sum now, it will be a mere trifle for
you.” Napoleon laughed heartily at this simplicity, so little in harmony
with the manners of the day: the old man never dreamt that the saints
were no longer in fashion.

On reaching Florence, Napoleon conceived it would be very satisfactory
to his namesake to send him the ribbon of the order of St. Stephen, of
which he was merely a knight; but the pious Abbé was much less anxious
about the favours of this world than the religious justice which he so
pertinaciously claimed: and, as it afterwards appeared, not without
reason. The Pope, when he came to Paris to crown the Emperor, also
recurred to the claims of Father Buonaventura. “It was doubtless he,”
said the Pope, “who, from his seat amongst the blessed, had led his
relative, as it were, by the hand through the glorious earthly career he
had traversed; and who had preserved Napoleon in the midst of so many
dangers and battles.” The Emperor, however, always turned a deaf ear to
these remarks; leaving it to the holy father’s own discretion to provide
for the glory of Buonaventura. As to the old Abbé of San Miniato, he
left his fortune to Napoleon, who presented it to one of the public
establishments in Tuscany.

It would, however, be very difficult to connect any genealogical data in
this place, from the conversations of the Emperor, who used often to say
he had never looked at one of his parchments: these having always
remained in the hands of his brother Joseph, whom he styled the
“genealogist of the family.” And, lest I may forget it, I will here
mention the fact of Napoleon’s having, when on the point of embarking,
delivered a packet to his brother, containing all the original letters
addressed to him by the sovereigns of Europe in their own hand-writing.
I frequently expressed my regret to the Emperor at his parting with such
a precious historical manuscript.[13]

Footnote 13:

  On my return to Europe, I did not fail to inquire for the invaluable
  deposit, and hastened to suggest the importance of making another copy
  to Prince Joseph, in order to become still more sure of its existence.
  What was my grief to hear that this historical monument had been
  mislaid, and that no person knew what had become of it! Into whose
  hands can it have fallen? May they know how to appreciate such a
  collection, and preserve it for history!

Charles Buonaparte, the father of Napoleon, was extremely tall,
handsome, and well-made; his education had been well conducted at Rome
and Pisa, where he studied the law: he is said to have possessed great
spirit and energy. It was he who, on its being proposed to submit to
France, in the public assembly of Corsica, delivered a speech which
electrified the whole country: he was not more than twenty years of age
at this period. “If it only depended on the will to become free,” said
he, “all nations would be so; yet history teaches us that very few have
attained the blessings of liberty, because few have had energy, courage,
and virtue enough to deserve them.”

When the island was conquered, he wished to accompany Paoli in his
emigration; but an old uncle, the Archdeacon Lucien, who exercised the
authority of a parent over him, prevented his departure.

In 1779, Charles Buonaparte was elected deputy to represent the nobles
of Corsica at Paris, whither he brought young Napoleon with him, then
only ten years old. He passed through Florence on his way, and obtained
a letter of introduction from the Grand Duke Leopold to his sister the
Queen of France. It was to his known rank and the respectability of his
name and family in Tuscany, that he was indebted for this mark of
attention.

[Illustration:

  _Charles Bonaparte._

  _London. Published for Henry Colburn. January, 1836._
]

There were two French generals in Corsica, at the above period, so
inimical to each other that their quarrels formed two parties; one was
M. de Marbeuf, a mild and popular character, and the other, M. de
Narbonne Pellet, distinguished for haughtiness and violence. The latter,
from his birth and superior interest, must have been a dangerous man for
his rival: fortunately for M. de Marbeuf, he was much more beloved in
the island. When the deputation headed by Charles Buonaparte arrived at
Versailles, he was consulted on the dispute, and the warmth of his
testimony obtained a triumph for Marbeuf. The Archbishop of Lyons,
nephew to Marbeuf, thought it his duty to wait on the deputy, and thank
him for the service he had rendered. On young Napoleon’s being placed in
the military school of Brienne, the Archbishop gave him a special
recommendation to the family of Brienne, which lived there during the
greater part of the year: hence the friendly demeanour of the Marbeufs
and Briennes towards the children of the Buonaparte family. Calumny has
assigned another cause, but the simple examination of dates is fully
sufficient to prove its absurdity.

Old M. de Marbeuf, who commanded in Corsica, lived at Ajaccio, where the
family of Charles Buonaparte was one of the principal. Madame Buonaparte
being the most fascinating and beautiful woman in the town, it was very
natural for the General to frequent her house in preference to many
other places of resort.

Charles Buonaparte died at the age of thirty-eight, of an induration in
the glands of the stomach. He had experienced a temporary cure during
one of his visits to Paris, but became the victim of a second attack at
Montpellier, where he was interred in one of the convents of the city.

During the Consulate, the notables of Montpellier, through the medium of
their countryman Chaptal, minister of the interior, solicited the
permission of the First Consul to erect a monument to the memory of his
father. Napoleon thanked them for their good intentions, but declined
acceding to their solicitation. “Let us not disturb the repose of the
dead,” said he; “let their ashes remain in peace. I have also lost my
grandfather and great-grandfather; why not erect monuments to them? This
might lead too far. Had my father died yesterday, it would be proper and
natural that my grief should be accompanied by some signal mark of
respect. But his death took place twenty years ago: it is an event of no
public interest, and it is useless to revive the recollection of it.” At
a subsequent period Louis Buonaparte, without the knowledge of Napoleon,
had his father’s remains disinterred, and removed to St. Leu, where he
erected a monument to his memory.

Charles Buonaparte had been the very reverse of devout; he had even
written some anti-religious poems; and yet, at the period of his death,
said the Emperor, there were not priests enough for him in Montpellier.
In this respect he was very different from his brother Archdeacon
Lucien, a very pious and orthodox ecclesiastic, who died long after him,
at a very advanced age. On his death-bed, he took great umbrage at
Fesch, who, being by this time a priest, ran to him in his stole and
surplice to assist him in his last moments. Lucien begged that he would
suffer him to die in peace, and he breathed his last surrounded by the
members of his family, giving them philosophic counsel and patriarchal
benedictions.

The Emperor frequently spoke of his old uncle, who had been a second
father to him, and who was for a length of time the head of the family.
He was Archdeacon of Ajaccio, one of the principal dignitaries of the
island. His prudence and economy re-established the affairs of the
family, which had been much deranged by the extravagance of Charles. The
old uncle was much revered, and enjoyed considerable authority in the
district: the peasantry voluntarily submitted their disputes to his
decision, and he freely gave them his advice and his blessing.

[Illustration:

  _Letizia Buonaparte_

  _Published for Henry Colburn, Dec. 1835._
]

Charles Buonaparte married Mademoiselle Letitia Ramolini, whose mother,
after the death of her first husband, married Captain Fesch, an officer
in one of the Swiss regiments, which the Genoese usually maintained in
the island. Cardinal Fesch was the issue of this second marriage, and
was consequently step-brother to Madame and uncle to the Emperor.

Madame was one of the most beautiful women of her day, and she was
celebrated throughout Corsica. Paoli, in the time of his power, having
received an embassy from Algiers or Tunis, wished to give the Barbary
envoys some notion of the attractions of the island, and for this
purpose he assembled together all the most beautiful women in Corsica,
among whom Madame took the lead. Subsequently, when she travelled to
Brienne to see her son, her personal charms were remarked even in Paris.

During the war for Corsican liberty, Madame Buonaparte shared the
dangers of her husband, who was an enthusiast in the cause. In his
different expeditions she frequently followed him on horseback, while
she was pregnant with Napoleon. She was a woman of extraordinary vigour
of mind, joined to considerable pride and loftiness of spirit. She was
the mother of thirteen children, and she might have had many more, for
she was a widow at the age of thirty. Of these thirteen children, only
five boys and three girls lived, all of whom performed distinguished
parts in the reign of Napoleon.

Joseph, the eldest of the family, was originally intended for the
church, on account of the influence possessed by Marbeuf, archbishop of
Lyons, who had the patronage of numerous livings. He went through the
regular course of study; but when the moment arrived for taking orders,
he refused to enter the ecclesiastical profession. He was successively
King of Naples and Spain.

Louis was King of Holland, and Jerome King of Westphalia. Eliza was
Grand Duchess of Tuscany; Caroline, Queen of Naples; and Pauline,
Princess Borghese. Lucien, who through his marriage and a mistaken
direction of character, doubtless forfeited a crown, atoned for all his
past errors by throwing himself into the arms of the Emperor on his
return from Elba, at a moment when Napoleon was far from relying on the
certainty of his prospects. Lucien, the Emperor used to say, passed a
turbulent career in his youth: at the age of fifteen he was taken to
France by M. Semonville, who soon made him a zealous revolutionist and
an ardent clubist. On this subject the Emperor said that in the numerous
libels published against him were some addresses or letters, bearing,
among other signatures, that of Brutus Buonaparte, which were attributed
to him, Napoleon; he would not affirm, he added, that these addresses
were not written by some individual of the family, but he could declare
that they were not his production.

I had the opportunity of rendering myself acquainted with the sentiments
of Prince Lucien, on the Emperor’s return from Elba, and am enabled to
say that it would have been difficult for any man to have been more
upright and steady in his political views, or to have evinced greater
attachment and good-will towards his brother.

                   MADEIRA, &c.—VIOLENT GALE.—CHESS.

22nd–26th. On the 22nd we came within sight of Madeira, and at night
arrived off the port. Only two of the vessels cast anchor, to take on
board supplies for the squadron. The wind blew very hard, and the sea
was exceedingly rough. The Emperor found himself indisposed, and I was
also ill. A sudden gale arose; the air was excessively hot, and seemed
to be impregnated with small particles of sand—we were now assailed by
the emanations of the terrible winds from the deserts of Africa. This
weather lasted throughout the whole of the following day. Our
communication with the shore became extremely difficult. The English
Consul came on board, and informed us that for many years there had not
been such a hurricane at Madeira; the vintage was entirely destroyed,
all the windows in the town were broken, and it had been found scarcely
possible to breathe in the streets. All this time we continued tacking
about before the town; which we continued to do throughout the whole of
the following night, and the 24th, when we took on board several oxen,
and stores of other provisions, such as unripe oranges, bad peaches, and
tasteless pears; the figs and grapes were however excellent. In the
evening we made way with great rapidity; the wind still blowing hard. On
the 25th and 26th we lay-to during a portion of each day, to distribute
provisions among the vessels composing the squadron; during the rest of
the time, we sailed on smoothly and rapidly.

Meanwhile nothing occurred to interrupt the uniformity of the scene.
Each day crept slowly on, and added to the past interval, which, as a
whole, seemed brief because it was void of interest, and not
characterized by any remarkable incident.

The Emperor had added to the number of his amusements by a game at
piquet, which he regularly played about three o’ clock. This was
succeeded by a few games at chess with the Grand Marshal, M. de
Montholon, or some other individual, until dinner-time. There was no
very good chess-player on board the vessel. The Emperor was but an
indifferent player; he gained with some and lost with others, a
circumstance which one evening led him to say, “How happens it that I
frequently lose with those who are never able to beat him whom I almost
always beat? Does not this seem contradictory? How is this problem to be
solved?” said he, winking his eye, to shew that he was not the dupe of
the constant politeness of him who was really the best player.

We no longer played at _vingt-et-un_ in the evening: we gave up this
game on account of our having played too high, at which the Emperor
appeared displeased, for he was a great enemy to gaming. On returning
from his afternoon walk on the deck. Napoleon played two or three games
at chess, and retired to rest early.

THE CANARIES.—PASSING THE TROPIC.—DETAILS OF THE EMPEROR’S
  CHILDHOOD.—NAPOLEON AT BRIENNE.—PICHEGRU.—NAPOLEON AT THE MILITARY
  SCHOOL IN PARIS.—IN THE ARTILLERY.—HIS COMPANIONS.—NAPOLEON AT THE
  COMMENCEMENT OF THE REVOLUTION.

27th—31st. At daybreak on Sunday, 27th, we found ourselves among the
Canaries, which we passed in the course of the day, sailing at the rate
of ten or twelve knots an hour, without having perceived the famous Peak
of Teneriffe—a circumstance the more extraordinary, since in clear
weather it is visible at the distance of sixty leagues.

On the 29th we crossed the tropic, and observed many flying fish round
the ship. On the 31st, at eleven at night, one of the sailors threw
himself overboard; he was a negro who had got drunk, and was fearful of
the flogging that awaited him. He had several times, in the course of
the evening, attempted to jump overboard, and at last succeeded. He
however soon repented, and uttered loud cries. He swam very well; but
though a boat was immediately sent off, and every endeavour used to
rescue him, he was lost. The cries of this man in the sea excited a
powerful sensation on board the vessel. In a moment the crew were
hurrying about in every direction: the noise was very great, and the
agitation universal.

As I was descending from deck to the cabin, a midshipman, a youth
between ten and twelve years of age, of an interesting countenance,
thinking I was going to inform the Emperor of what had occurred, laid
hold of my coat, and in a tone expressive of the tenderest interest
exclaimed, “Ah, Sir, do not alarm him! Tell him the noise is nothing at
all; that it is only a man fallen overboard.” Amiable and innocent
youth! he expressed his sentiments rather than his thoughts!

In general the midshipmen, of whom there were several on board the ship,
behaved with marked respect and attention to the Emperor. They every
evening repeated a scene that made a deep impression on our feelings.
Early in the morning the sailors carried up their hammocks, and put them
in the large nettings at the sides of the ship; and about six in the
evening they carried them away at the signal of a whistle. Those who
were tardy in the performance of this duty received a certain
punishment. On the signal being given, a great bustle ensued; and it was
gratifying to see the midshipmen at this moment form a circle round the
Emperor, whether he might be standing in the middle of the deck, or
resting on his favourite gun. They watched his motions with an anxious
eye, and either by signs or words directed the sailors to avoid
incommoding him. The Emperor frequently observed this conduct, and
remarked that youthful hearts were always inclined to enthusiasm.

I will now proceed with the details, which I collected at various times,
respecting the early years of the Emperor’s life.

Napoleon was born about noon on the 15th of August (Assumption-day) in
the year 1769. His mother, who was possessed of great bodily as well as
mental vigour, and who had braved the dangers of war during her
pregnancy, wished to attend mass on account of the solemnity of the day:
she was, however, taken ill at church, and on her return home was
delivered before she could be conveyed to her chamber. The child, as
soon as it was born, was laid on the carpet, which was an old-fashioned
one, representing at full length the heroes of fable, or, perhaps, of
the Iliad. This child was Napoleon.

In his boyhood Napoleon was turbulent, adroit, lively and agile in the
extreme. He had gained, he used to say, the most complete ascendancy
over his elder brother Joseph. The latter was beaten and ill-treated;
complaints were carried to the mother, and she would begin to scold
before poor Joseph had even time to open his mouth.

At the age of ten, Napoleon was sent to the military school at Brienne.
His name, which in his Corsican accent he pronounced as if written
Napoilloné, from the similarity of the sound, procured for him, among
his youthful companions, the nick-name of _la paille au nez_ (straw in
his nose). At this period a great change took place in Napoleon’s
character. In contradiction to all the apocryphal histories, which
contain anecdotes of his life, he was when at Brienne mild, quiet, and
susceptible. One day the quarter master, who was a man of harsh
disposition, and who never took the trouble of considering the physical
and moral shades of character in each individual scholar, condemned
Napoleon, by way of punishment, to wear the serge coat, and to take his
dinner on his knees at the door of the refectory. Napoleon, who had a
vast share of pride and self-conceit, was so mortified by this disgrace,
that he was seized with a violent retching, and suffered a severe
nervous attack. The head master of the school happening accidentally to
pass by, relieved him from the punishment, reproving the quarter-master
for his want of discernment; and Father Patrault, the professor of
mathematics, was very indignant on finding that his first mathematician
had been treated with so little respect.

[14]“On attaining the age of puberty, Napoleon’s temper became morose
and reserved; his passion for reading was carried to excess; and he
eagerly devoured the contents of every book that fell in his way.
Pichegru was at this time his quarter-master and his tutor in the four
rules of arithmetic.

“Pichegru was a native of Franche-Comté, where his family were farmers.
The Minim monks of Champagne were appointed to superintend the military
school of Brienne. Owing to their poverty, however, so few individuals
were induced to enter their order that they found themselves inadequate
to the task imposed on them; and they solicited the assistance of the
Minim monks of Franche-Comté, of whom Father Patrault was one. An aunt
of Pichegru’s, a nun of La Charité, followed Patrault, for the purpose
of superintending the infirmary, and she was accompanied by her nephew,
a youth who was admitted to the school to receive his education
gratuitously. Pichegru, who was extremely clever, was, on his attaining
a suitable age, made quarter-master and tutor under Father Patrault, who
had taught him mathematics. He intended to become a monk, which was the
sole object of his ambition and of his aunt’s wishes. But Father
Patrault dissuaded him from this intention, assuring him that the
profession was not suited to the age; and that he ought to look forward
to something better: he prevailed on him to enlist in the artillery,
where the Revolution found him a sub-officer. His military career is
known:—he was the conqueror of Holland. Thus Father Patrault had the
honour of counting among his pupils the two greatest generals of modern
France.

“Father Patrault was subsequently secularized by M. de Brienne,
Archbishop of Sens and Cardinal de Lomenie, who made him one of his
grand vicars, and intrusted him with the management of his numerous
benefices.

“At the time of the Revolution, Father Patrault, though his opinions
were widely opposite to those of his patron, nevertheless exerted every
endeavour to save him, and with this view applied to Danton, who was a
native of the same part of France to which the Cardinal and himself
belonged. But all was unavailing; and it is supposed that Patrault,
after the manner of the ancients, rendered to the Cardinal the service
of procuring for him a poisoned draught to save him from the scaffold.

“Madame de Lomenie, the Cardinal’s niece, before her life was sacrificed
by the revolutionary tribunal, intrusted Father Patrault with the care
of her two daughters, who were yet in their childhood. The moment of
terror having passed away, their aunt Madame de Brienne, who had escaped
the storm and preserved a considerable portion of her fortune, applied
to Father Patrault for the children; but he refused to give them up, on
the ground that their mother had directed him to withdraw them from the
world and to devote them to the occupation of peasants. He had conceived
the design of literally executing these figurative commands, and was on
the point of uniting them to two of his own nephews. ‘I was then,’ said
Napoleon, ‘General of the Army of the Interior, and I became the
mediator for the restoration of the two children, an object which was
not accomplished without difficulty. Patrault employed every possible
means of resistance. These daughters of Madame de Lomenie were the two
ladies whom you have since known by the names of Madame de Marnesia, and
the beautiful Madame de Canisy, Duchess de Vicenza.’

“Father Patrault, having renewed his acquaintance with his old pupil,
followed him and joined the Army of Italy, where he proved himself
better able to calculate projectiles than to meet their effects. At
Montenotte, Millesimo, and Dego, he evinced the most puerile cowardice.
During the action he was occupied, not like Moses, in praying, but in
weeping. The General-in-chief appointed him administrator of domains at
Milan, from which he derived considerable profits. On Napoleon’s return
from Egypt, he presented himself to him: he was no longer the little
Minim monk of Champagne, but a corpulent financier, possessed of upwards
of a million. Two years afterwards he again sought an interview with the
First Consul at Malmaison: he now looked mean, dejected, and shabbily
dressed. ‘How is this?’ inquired the Consul. ‘You see before you a
ruined man,’ replied Patrault; ‘one who is reduced to beggary; the
victim of severe misfortune.’ The First Consul determined to investigate
the truth of this statement; he discovered that Father Patrault had
commenced the trade of an usurer. The great calculator had lost his
fortune through bankruptcies, in lending at great risk for a high
interest. ‘I have already paid my debt,’ said the First Consul, at his
next interview with him; ‘I can do no more for you; I cannot make a
man’s fortune twice.’ He contented himself with granting Patrault a
pension sufficient for his subsistence.

“Napoleon retained but a faint idea of Pichegru; he remembered that he
was a tall man, rather red in the face. Pichegru, on the contrary, seems
to have preserved a striking recollection of young Napoleon. When
Pichegru joined the royalist party, he was asked whether it would not be
possible to gain over the General-in-chief of the Army of Italy. ‘To
attempt that would only be wasting time,’ said he: ‘from my knowledge of
him when a boy, I am sure he must be a most inflexible character: he has
formed his resolutions, and he will not change them.’”

Footnote 14:

  These lines were dictated by the Emperor himself:—how and when will be
  hereafter explained.

The Emperor has often been much amused at the tales and anecdotes that
are related of his boyhood, in the numerous little publications to which
he had given rise: he acknowledges the accuracy of scarcely any of them.
There is one, relative to his confirmation at the military school of
Paris, which, however, he admitted to be true. It is as follows:—the
archbishop who confirmed him, manifesting his astonishment at the name
of Napoleon, said he did not know of any such saint, and that there was
no such name in the calendar; the boy quickly replied, that that could
be no rule, since there were an immense number of saints, and only 365
days.

Napoleon never observed his festival-day until after the Concordat: his
patron saint was a stranger to the French Calendar, and even where his
name is recorded the date of his festival is a matter of uncertainty.
The Pope, however, fixed it for the 15th of August, which was at once
the Emperor’s birth-day, and the day of the signing of the Concordat.

[15]“In 1783, Napoleon was one of the scholars who, at the usual
competition at Brienne, were fixed upon to be sent to the military
school at Paris, to finish their education. The choice was made annually
by an inspector, who visited the twelve military schools. This office
was filled by the Chevalier de Keralio, a general officer, and the
author of a work on military tactics. He was also the tutor of the
present [the late] King of Bavaria, who in his youth bore the title of
Duke of Deux-Ponts. Keralio was an amiable old man and well qualified to
discharge the duty of Inspector of the military schools. He was fond of
the boys, played with them when they had finished their examinations,
and permitted those who had acquitted themselves most to his
satisfaction to dine with him at the table of the monks. He was
particularly attached to young Napoleon, and took a pleasure in
stimulating him to exertion. He singled him out to be sent to Paris,
though it would appear he had not at that time attained the requisite
age. The lad was not very far advanced in any branch of education except
mathematics, and the monks suggested that it would be better to wait
till the following year, to afford time for further improvement. But
this the Chevalier de Keralio would by no means agree to; ‘I know what I
am about,’ said he, ‘and if I am transgressing the rules, it is not on
account of family influence:—I know nothing of the friends of this
youth. I am actuated only by my own opinion of his merit. I perceive in
him a spark of genius which cannot be too early fostered.’ The worthy
chevalier died suddenly, before he had time to carry his determination
into effect; but his successor, M. de Regnaud, who would not perhaps
have evinced half his penetration, nevertheless fulfilled his intention,
and young Napoleon was sent to Paris.”

Footnote 15:

  Dictated by the Emperor.

At this period he began to develop qualities of a superior order:
decision of character, profound reflection, and vigorous conceptions. It
would appear, that from his earliest childhood his parents rested all
their hopes on him. His father, when on his death-bed at Montpellier,
though Joseph was beside him, spoke only of Napoleon, who was then at
the military school. In the delirium with which he was seized in his
last moments, he incessantly called Napoleon to come to his aid with his
_great sword_. The grand uncle, Lucien, who on his death-bed was
surrounded by all his relatives, said, addressing himself to Joseph,
“You are the eldest of the family; but there is the head of it (pointing
to Napoleon). Never lose sight of him.” The Emperor used to laugh and
say, “This was a true disinheritance: it was the scene of Jacob and
Esau.”

Having myself been educated at the military school of Paris, though at
an earlier period than that at which Napoleon attended it, I was
enabled, on returning from my emigration, to converse about the Emperor
with the masters who had been common to us both.

M. de l’Eguille, our teacher of history, used to boast that the records
of the military school contained proofs of his having foretold the great
career which his pupil was destined to fill; and that he had frequently,
in his notes, eulogised the depth of his reflection, and the shrewdness
of his judgment. He informed me that the First Consul used often to
invite him to breakfast at Malmaison, and that he always took pleasure
in conversing about his old lessons.—“That which made the deepest
impression on me,” said he, one day to M. de l’Eguille, “was the revolt
of the Constable de Bourbon, though you did not present it to us
precisely in its proper light. You made it appear that his great crime
was his having fought against his king; which certainly was but a
trifling fault, in those days of divided nobility and sovereignty;
particularly considering the scandalous injustice of which he was the
victim. His great, his real, his only crime, and that on which you did
not sufficiently dwell, was his having joined with foreigners to attack
his native country.”

M. Domairon, our professor of belles-lettres, informed me that he had
always been struck with the singularity of Napoleon’s amplifications,
which he said were like granite heated in a volcano.

Only one individual formed a mistaken idea of him; that was M. Bauer,
the dull heavy German master. Young Napoleon never made much progress in
the German language, which offended M. Bauer, who ranked German above
all things, and he in consequence formed a most contemptible opinion of
his pupil’s abilities. One day, Napoleon not being in his place, M.
Bauer inquired where he was, and was told that he was attending his
examination in the class of artillery. “What! does he know any thing?”
said M. Bauer ironically. “Why, Sir, he is the best mathematician in the
school,” was the reply. “Ah! I have always heard it remarked, and I have
always believed, that none but a fool could learn mathematics.” “It
would be curious,” said the Emperor, “to know whether M. Bauer lived
long enough to see me rise in the world, and to enjoy the confirmation
of his own judgment.”

Napoleon was scarcely eighteen years of age when the Abbé Raynal, struck
with the extent of his acquirements, appreciated his merit so highly as
to make him one of the ornaments of his scientific _déjeûners_. Finally,
the celebrated Paoli, who, after having long inspired Napoleon with a
sort of veneration, found the latter at the head of a party against him,
the moment he shewed himself favourable to the English, was accustomed
to say—“This young man is formed on the ancient model. He is one of
Plutarch’s men.”

In 1785, Napoleon, who was appointed at once a cadet and an officer of
artillery, quitted the military school to enter the regiment of la Fère
with the rank of second lieutenant; from which he was promoted to the
rank of first lieutenant in the regiment of Grenoble.

Napoleon, on quitting the military school, went to join his regiment at
Valence. The first winter he spent there, his comrades at the mess-table
were Lariboissière, whom, during the empire, he appointed
inspector-general of the artillery; Sorbier, who succeeded Lariboissière
in that post; d’Hedouville, junior, afterwards minister plenipotentiary
at Frankfort; Mallet, brother of him who headed the tumult in Paris in
1813; an officer named Mabille, whom, on his return from emigration, the
Emperor appointed to a situation in the post-office; Rolland de
Villarceaux, afterwards prefect of Nismes; Desmazzis, junior, his
companion at the military school, and the friend of his early years, who
after Napoleon ascended the throne, became keeper of the Imperial
wardrobe.

There were in the corps officers more or less easy in their
circumstances; Napoleon ranked among the former. He received from his
family 1200 francs a year, which was then the amount of an officer’s
full pay. There were two individuals in the regiment who could afford to
keep cabriolets, or carriages of some kind, and they were looked upon as
very great men. Sorbier was one of these two: his companions got him to
drive them about, and they repaid the obligation by jokes and puns.
Sorbier was the son of a physician at Moulins.

At Valence, Napoleon obtained an early introduction to Madame du
Columbier, a lady about fifty years of age, who was endowed with many
rare and estimable qualities, and who was the most distinguished person
in the town. She entertained a great regard for the young
artillery-officer, and through her acquaintance he mingled in all the
best company in Valence and its neighbourhood. She introduced him to the
Abbé de Saint Rufe, an elderly man of property, who was frequently
visited by the most distinguished persons in the country. Napoleon was
indebted for the favour he enjoyed to his extensive information, joined
to the facility and force with which he turned it to account. Madame du
Colombier often foretold that he would be a distinguished man. The death
of this lady happened about the time of the breaking out of the
Revolution: it was an event in which she took great interest, and in her
last moments was heard to say that, if no misfortune befel young
Napoleon, he would infallibly play a distinguished part in the events of
the time. The Emperor never spoke of Madame du Colombier but with
expressions of the tenderest gratitude; and he did not hesitate to
acknowledge that the valuable introductions and superior company in
society which she procured for him had great influence over his destiny.

The gaiety which Napoleon enjoyed at this period of his life, excited
great jealousy on the part of his fellow-officers. They were displeased
at seeing him absent himself so frequently from among them, though his
doing so could be no reasonable ground of offence to them. Fortunately
the commandant, M. d’Urtubie, had formed a just estimate of his
character: he shewed him great kindness, and afforded him the means of
fulfilling his military duties, and at the same time of mingling in the
pleasures of society.

Napoleon conceived an attachment for Mademoiselle du Colombier, who, on
her part, was not insensible to his merits. It was the first love of
both; and it was that kind of love which might be expected to arise at
their age and with their education. “We were the most innocent creatures
imaginable,” the Emperor used to say; “we contrived little meetings
together: I well remember one which took place on a Midsummer morning,
just as daylight began to dawn. It will scarcely be believed that all
our happiness consisted in eating cherries together.”

It has been said that the mother wished to bring about this marriage,
and that the father opposed it on the ground that they would ruin each
other by their union; while each was separately destined to a fortunate
career. But this story is untrue, as is likewise another anecdote
relative to a marriage with Mademoiselle Clary, afterwards Madame
Bernadotte, now Queen of Sweden.

In 1805, the Emperor, when about to be crowned King of Italy, on passing
through Lyons, again saw Mademoiselle du Colombier, who had now changed
her name to Madame de Bressieux. She gained access to him with some
difficulty, surrounded as he was by the etiquette of royalty. Napoleon
was happy to see her again; but he found her much altered for the worse.
He did for her husband what she solicited, and placed her in the
situation of lady of honour to one of his sisters.

Mademoiselles de Laurencin and Saint-Germain were at that time the
reigning toasts in Valence, where they divided the general admiration.
The latter married Monsieur de Montalivet, who was also known to the
Emperor at that time, and who was afterwards made Minister of the
Interior. “He was an honest fellow,” said Napoleon, “and one who, I
believe, remained firmly attached to me.”

When about eighteen or twenty years of age, the Emperor was
distinguished as a young man of extensive information, possessing a
reflective turn of mind and strong reasoning powers. His reading had
been very extensive, and he had profoundly meditated on the fund of
knowledge thus acquired, much of which, he used to say, he had probably
since lost. His sparkling and ready wit and energetic language
distinguished him wherever he went: he was a favourite with every one,
particularly with the fair sex, to whom he recommended himself by the
elegance and novelty of his ideas, and the boldness of his arguments. As
for the men, they were often afraid to engage with him in those
discussions into which he was led by a natural confidence in his own
powers.

Many individuals, who knew him at an early period of life, predicted his
extraordinary career; and they viewed the events of his life without
astonishment. At an early age he gained anonymously a prize at the
Academy of Lyons, on the following question, proposed by Raynal:—“_What
are the principles and institutions calculated to advance mankind to the
highest possible degree of happiness?_” The anonymous memorial excited
great attention: it was perfectly in unison with the ideas of the age.
It began by enquiring in what happiness consisted; and the answer was,
in the perfect enjoyment of life in the manner most conformable with our
moral and physical organization. After he became Emperor, Napoleon was
one day conversing on this subject with M. de Talleyrand: the latter,
like a skilful courtier, shortly after presented to him the famous
memorial, which he had procured from the archives of the Academy of
Lyons. The Emperor took it, and, after reading a few pages, threw into
the fire this first production of his youth. “We can never think of
every thing,” said Napoleon: and M. de Talleyrand had not taken the
precaution of having it copied.

The Prince de Condé one day visited the Artillery school at Auxonne; and
the cadets considered it a high honour to be examined by that military
prince. The commandant, in spite of the hierarchy, placed young Napoleon
at the head of the polygon, in preference to others of superior rank. It
happened that, on the day preceding the examination, all the cannons of
the polygon were spiked: but Napoleon was too much on the alert to be
caught by this trick of his comrades, or snare, perhaps, of the
illustrious traveller.

It is generally believed that Napoleon, in his boyhood, was taciturn,
sullen, and morose: on the contrary, he was of a very lively turn. He
never appeared more delighted than when relating to us the various
tricks he was accustomed to play when at the School of Artillery. In
describing the joyous moments of his early youth, he seems to forget the
misfortunes which hold him in captivity.

There was an old commandant, upwards of eighty years of age, for whom
the cadets entertained a very high respect, notwithstanding the many
jokes they played upon him. One day, while he was examining them in
their cannon exercise, and watching every discharge with his eye-glass,
he asserted they were far from hitting the mark, and asked those near
him if they had seen the ball strike. Nobody had observed the youths’
slipping aside the ball every time they loaded. The old general was
rather sharp; after five or six discharges, he took it into his head to
count the balls. The trick was discovered. The general thought it a very
good one; but nevertheless ordered all who had participated in it to be
put under arrest.

The cadets would occasionally take a pique at some of their captains, or
determine to revenge themselves on others to whom they owed a grudge.
They then resolved to banish them from society, and to reduce them to
the necessity of putting themselves under a sort of arrest. Four or five
of the cadets undertook to execute the design. They fastened on their
victim; pursued him into every company, and he was not suffered to open
his mouth without being methodically and logically contradicted, though
always with a strict regard to politeness: at length the poor fellow
found that retirement was his only alternative.

“On another occasion,” Napoleon used to relate, “one of my comrades who
lodged above me unluckily took a fancy to learn to play the horn, and
made such a hideous noise as completely disturbed the studies of those
who were within hearing. We met each other one day on the stairs; ‘Are
you not tired of practising the horn?’ said I. ‘Not at all,’ he replied.
‘At any rate, you tire other people.’ ‘I am sorry for it.’ ‘It would be
better if you went to practise elsewhere.’ ‘I am master of my own
apartment.’ ‘Perhaps you may be taught to entertain a doubt on that
point.’ ‘I scarcely think any one will be bold enough to attempt to
teach me that.’” A challenge ensued; but before the antagonists met, the
affair was submitted to the consideration of a council of the cadets,
and it was determined that the one should practise the horn at a greater
distance, and that the other should be more accommodating.

In the campaign of 1814, the Emperor again met his horn-player in the
neighbourhood of Soissons or Laon: he was residing on his estate, and
gave some important information respecting the enemy’s position. The
Emperor made him one of his aides-de-camp; this officer was Colonel
Bussy.

When attached to his artillery-regiment, Napoleon seized every
opportunity of mingling in company, where he invariably made an
agreeable impression. Women at that time attached a high value to wit in
the other sex; it was a quality which never failed to win their good
graces. Napoleon, at this period, performed what he termed his
Sentimental Journey from Valence to Mont-Cenis in Burgundy, and he
intended to write an account of it after the manner of Sterne. The
faithful Desmazzis was of the party: he was constantly with him, and his
narrative of Napoleon’s private life, if combined with the details of
his public career, would form a perfect history of the Emperor. It would
then be seen that, however extraordinary his life might be with respect
to its incidents, yet nothing could be more simple or natural than its
course.

Circumstances and reflection have considerably modified his character.
Even his style of expression, now so concise and laconic, was in his
youth diffuse and emphatic. At the time of the Legislative Assembly,
Napoleon assumed a serious and severe demeanour, and became less
communicative than before. The army of Italy also marked another epoch
in his character. His extreme youth, when he went to take the command of
the army, rendered it necessary that he should evince great reserve, and
the utmost strictness of morals. “This was indispensably necessary,”
said he, “to enable me to command men so much above me in point of age.
I pursued a line of conduct truly irreproachable and exemplary. I proved
myself a sort of Cato. I must have appeared such in the eyes of all. I
was a philosopher and a sage.” In this character he appeared on the
theatre of the world.

Napoleon was in garrison at Valence when the Revolution broke out. At
that time it was made a point of particular importance to induce the
artillery-officers to emigrate; and the officers, on their part, were
very much divided in opinion. Napoleon, who was thoroughly imbued with
the notions of the age, possessing a natural instinct for great actions
and a passion for national glory, espoused the cause of the Revolution;
and his example influenced the majority of the regiment. He was an
ardent patriot under the Constituent Assembly; but the Legislative
Assembly marked a new period in his ideas and opinions.

He was at Paris on the 21st of June, 1792, and witnessed the
insurrection of the people of the Faubourgs, who traversed the garden of
the Tuileries, and forced the palace. There were but 6000 men; a mere
disorderly mob, whose language and dress proved them to belong to the
very lowest class of society.

Napoleon was also a witness of the events of the 10th of August, in
which the assailants were neither higher in rank nor more formidable in
number.

In 1793, Napoleon was in Corsica, where he had a command in the National
Guards. He opposed Paoli, as soon as he was led to suspect that the
veteran, to whom he had hitherto been so much attached, entertained the
design of betraying the island to the English. Therefore it is not true,
as it has been generally reported, that Napoleon, or one of his family,
was at one time in England, proposing to raise a Corsican regiment for
the English service.

The English and Paoli subdued the Corsican patriots, and burnt Ajaccio.
The house of the Buonapartes was destroyed in the general conflagration,
and the family was obliged to fly to the Continent. They fixed their
abode at Marseilles, whence Napoleon proceeded to Paris. He arrived just
at the moment when the federalists of Marseilles had surrendered Toulon
to the English.

CAPE VERD ISLANDS.—NAPOLEON AT THE SIEGE OF TOULON.—RISE OF DUROC
  AND JUNOT.—NAPOLEON QUARRELS WITH THE REPRESENTATIVES OF
  THE PEOPLE.—QUARRELS WITH AUBRY.—ANECDOTES RELATIVE TO
  VENDEMIAIRE.—NAPOLEON GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF ITALY.—INTEGRITY OF HIS
  MILITARY ADMINISTRATION.—HIS DISINTERESTEDNESS.—NICK-NAMED
  PETIT-CAPORAL.—DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE SYSTEM OF THE DIRECTORY AND THAT
  OF THE GENERAL OF THE ARMY OF ITALY.

September 1st—6th. On the 1st of September we found from our latitude
that we should see the Cape Verd Islands in the course of the day. The
sky was, however, overcast, and at night we could see nothing. The
Admiral, convinced that there was a mistake in the reckoning of our
longitude, was preparing to bear westward to the right, in order to fall
in with the islands, when a brig, which was ahead of us, intimated by a
signal that she had discovered them on the left. During the night the
wind blew violently from the south-east, and if our mistake had been the
reverse of what it was, and the Admiral had really borne to the right,
it is not improbable that we should have been thrown out of our course;
a proof that, notwithstanding the improvements in science, mistakes are
very apt to take place, and that the chances of navigation are very
great. As the wind continued to blow strong, and the sea was boisterous,
the Admiral preferred continuing his course, rather than waiting to take
in water, of which he believed he had already a sufficient store. Every
thing now promised a prosperous passage; we were already very far
advanced on our course. Every circumstance continued favourable; the
weather was mild, and we might even have thought our voyage agreeable,
had it been undertaken in the pursuit of our own plans and in conformity
with our own inclinations: but how could we forget our past misfortunes,
or close our eyes on the future?——

Occupation alone could enable us to support the languor and tedium of
our days. I had undertaken to teach my son English; and the Emperor, to
whom I mentioned the progress he was making, expressed a wish to learn
also. I endeavoured to form a very simple plan for his instruction, in
order to save him trouble. This did very well for two or three days; but
the _ennui_ occasioned by the study was at least equal to that which it
was intended to counteract, and the English was laid aside. The Emperor
occasionally reproached me with having discontinued my lessons: I
replied that I had the medicine ready, if he had the courage to take it.
In other respects, particularly before the English, his manners and
habits were always the same: never did a murmur or a wish escape his
lips; he invariably appeared contented, patient, and good-humoured.

The admiral, who, on account of our reputation, I suppose, had assumed
great stiffness, on our departure from England, gradually laid aside his
reserve, and every day took greater interest in his captive. He
represented the danger incurred by coming on deck after dinner, owing to
the damp of the evening; the Emperor would then sometimes take his arm
and prolong the conversation, which never failed to gratify him
exceedingly. I have been assured that the Admiral carefully noted down
every particular that he could collect. If this be true, the remarks
which the Emperor one day made, during dinner, on naval affairs—on the
French resources in the south; those which he had already created, and
those which he contemplated; and on the ports and harbours of the
Mediterranean: to all of which the Admiral listened with deep attention,
and as if fearful of interruption—will compose a chapter truly valuable
to a seaman.

I will now return to the details collected during our ordinary
conversation. The following relate to the siege of Toulon.

In September 1793, Napoleon Buonaparte, then in his twenty-fourth year,
was yet unknown to the world which was destined to resound with his
name. He was a lieutenant-colonel of artillery, and had been only a few
weeks in Paris; having left Corsica, where political events had forced
him to yield to the faction of Paoli. The English had taken possession
of Toulon; an experienced artillery-officer was wanting to direct the
operations of the siege, and Napoleon was fixed on. There will history
take him up, never more to leave him;—there commences his immortality.

I refer to the Memoirs of the Campaign of Italy for the plan of attack
which he adopted, and the manner in which that plan was carried into
effect. It will there be seen that it was he, and he alone, who took the
fortress. This was a great triumph, no doubt: but to appreciate it
justly, it would be necessary to compare the plan of the attack with the
account of the evacuation; the one is the literal prediction, and the
other is the fulfilment word for word. From this moment the young
commander of artillery enjoyed the highest reputation. The Emperor never
looks back to this period without pleasure, and always mentions it as
the happiest portion of his life. The taking of Toulon was his first
successful achievement, and it naturally excites the fondest
recollections. The history of the campaign of Italy will present a
faithful picture of the three generals-in-chief who succeeded each other
during the siege: the inconceivable ignorance of Cartaux, the gloomy
brutality of Doppet, and the honest courage of Dugommier. Of them I
shall here say nothing.

At the first breaking out of the Revolution, there was nothing but
disorder in the _matériel_ and ignorance in the _personnel_ of the
French army, which was owing both to the confusion of the times and the
rapidity and irregularity with which the promotions had been made. The
following story will afford an idea of the state of affairs and of the
manners of the time:—

On his arrival at head-quarters, Napoleon waited on General Cartaux, a
fine figure, covered with gold lace from head to foot, who asked him
what duty he had been sent upon. The young officer modestly presented
the letter which directed him to superintend, under the general’s
command, the operations of the artillery. “This was quite unnecessary,”
said the fine-looking man, twirling his whiskers; “we want no assistance
to retake Toulon: however, you are welcome, and you may share the glory
of burning the town to-morrow, without having experienced any of the
fatigue.” And he made him stay to sup with him.

A party of thirty sat down to table; the general alone was served like a
prince, while every one else was dying of hunger; a circumstance which,
in those days of equality, strangely shocked the new guest. The next
morning, at break of day, the general took him out in his cabriolet, to
admire, as he said, the preparations for attack. As soon as he had
crossed the height, and come within sight of the roads, they got out of
the carriage, and entered some vineyards by the road side. The
commandant of artillery then perceived some pieces of ordnance, and some
digging, for which it was literally impossible for him in the slightest
degree to account. “Dupas,” said the general haughtily, turning to his
aide-de-camp, his confidential man, “are those our batteries?”—“Yes,
general.”—“And our park?” “There, close at hand.”—“And our red-hot
balls?”—“In yonder houses, where two companies have been employed all
the morning in heating them.”—“But how shall we be able to carry these
red-hot balls?” This consideration seemed to puzzle them both
completely, and they turned to the officer of artillery, and begged to
know whether, through his scientific knowledge, he could not explain how
the thing was to be managed. Napoleon, who would have been very much
tempted to take the whole for a hoax, had his interrogators evinced less
simplicity, for they were more than a league and a half from the object
of attack, summoned to his aid all the gravity he was master of, and
endeavoured to persuade them, before they troubled themselves about
red-hot balls, to try the range of the shot with cold ones. After a
great deal of trouble, he at length prevailed on them to follow his
advice, but not till he had very luckily made use of the technical term
_coup d’épreuve_, (proof-shot,) which took their fancy, and brought them
over to his opinion. They then made the experiment, but the shot did not
reach to a third of the distance required: and the general and Dupas
began to abuse the Marseillais and the Aristocrats who had, they said,
maliciously spoiled the powder. In the mean time the representative of
the people came up on horseback: this was Gasparin, an intelligent man,
who had served in the army.—Napoleon, perceiving how things were going
on, and boldly deciding on the course he meant to pursue, immediately
assumed great confidence of manner, and urged the representative to
intrust him with the whole direction of the affair. He exposed, without
hesitation, the unparalleled ignorance of all who were about him, and
from that moment took upon himself the entire direction of the siege.

Cartaux was a man of such limited intellect that it was impossible to
make him understand that, to facilitate the taking of Toulon, it would
be necessary to make the attack at the outlet of the road. When the
commandant of artillery sometimes pointed to this outlet on the map, and
told him _there was Toulon_, Cartaux suspected he knew very little of
geography; and when, in spite of his opposition, the authority of the
representative decided on the adoption of this distant point of attack,
the general was haunted by the idea of treasonable designs, and he would
often remark, with great uneasiness, that Toulon did not lie in that
direction.

Cartaux wanted one day to oblige the commandant to erect a battery, with
the rear of the guns so close against the front of a house as to leave
no room for the recoil. On another occasion, on his return from the
morning parade, he sent for the commandant to tell him that he had just
discovered a position, from which a battery of from six to twelve pieces
would infallibly carry Toulon in a few days: it was a little hillock
which would command three or four forts and several points of the town.
He was enraged at the refusal of the commandant of artillery, who
observed to him that, although the battery commanded every point, it was
itself commanded by every point; that the twelve guns would have one
hundred and fifty to oppose them; and that simple subtraction would
suffice to show him his disadvantage. The commandant of the engineer
department was called on for his opinion, and, as he concurred without
hesitation in that of the commandant of artillery, Cartaux said that it
was impossible to do any thing with those learned corps, as they all
went hand-in-hand. At length, to put a stop to difficulties which were
continually recurring, the representative decided that Cartaux should
communicate to the commandant of artillery his general plan of attack,
and that the latter should execute the details, according to the rules
of his department. The following was Cartaux’s memorable plan:—“The
general of artillery shall batter Toulon during three days, at the
expiration of which time I will attack it with three columns, and carry
it.”

At Paris, however, the engineer committee found this summary measure
much more humorous than wise, and it was one of the causes which led to
Cartaux’s recal. There was indeed no want of plans; for, the retaking of
Toulon having been proposed as a subject for competition in the popular
societies, plans poured in from all quarters. Napoleon says he must have
received at least six hundred during the siege. It was to the
representative Gasparin that Napoleon was indebted for the triumph of
his plan (that which took Toulon) over the objections of the Committees
of the Convention. He preserved a grateful recollection of this
circumstance: it was Gasparin, he used to say, who had first opened his
career.[16]

Footnote 16:

  The Emperor has, in his will, paid a tribute of gratitude to the
  representative Gasparin, for the special protection he received from
  him.

  He has honoured with a similar tribute General Duteil, the head of his
  School of Artillery, and General Dugommier, for the attention and
  kindness he had experienced from them.

In all the disputes between Cartaux and the commandant of artillery,
which usually took place in the presence of the general’s wife, the
latter uniformly took the part of the officer of artillery, saying, with
great _naïveté_ to her husband, “Let the young man alone, he knows more
about it than you do, for he never asks your advice; besides, it is you
who are to give the account: the glory will be yours.”

This woman was not without some share of good sense. On her return to
Paris, after the recal of her husband, the jacobins of Marseilles gave a
splendid fête in honour of the disgraced family. In the course of the
evening the conversation happened to fall on the commandant of
artillery, who was enthusiastically praised. “Do not reckon on him,”
said she; “that young man has too much understanding to remain long a
_sans-culotte_.” On which the general exclaimed, with the voice of a
Stentor, “Wife Cartaux, would you make us all out to be fools then?”
“No, I do not say that, my dear; but ... I must tell you, he is not one
of your sort.”

One day, at head quarters, a superb carriage arrived from the Paris
road; it was followed by a second, and a third; and at length no fewer
than fifteen appeared. It may be imagined how great was the astonishment
and curiosity occasioned by such a circumstance in those times of
republican simplicity. The _grand monarque_ himself could not have
travelled with greater pomp. The whole cavalcade had been procured by a
requisition in the capital; several of the carriages had belonged to the
Court. About sixty soldiers, of fine appearance, alighted from them, and
inquired for the General-in-chief; they marched up to him with the
important air of ambassadors:—“Citizen General,” said the orator of the
party, “we come from Paris; the patriots are indignant at your
inactivity and delay. The soil of the Republic has long been violated;
she is enraged to think that the insult still remains unavenged: she
asks, why is Toulon not yet retaken? Why is the English fleet not yet
destroyed? In her indignation, she has appealed to her brave sons; we
have obeyed her summons, and burn with impatience to fulfil her
expectation. We are volunteer gunners from Paris: furnish us with arms,
to-morrow we will march upon the enemy.” The General, disconcerted at
this address, turned to the commandant of artillery, who promised, in a
whisper, to rid him of these heroes next morning. They were well
received, and at day-break the commandant of artillery led them to the
sea-shore, and put some guns at their disposal. Astonished to find
themselves exposed from head to foot, they asked whether there was no
shelter or epaulement. They were told that all those things were out of
fashion; that patriotism had abolished them. Meanwhile, an English
frigate fired a broadside, and put all the braggadocios to flight. There
was but one cry throughout the camp; some openly fled, and the rest
quietly mingled with the besiegers.

Disorder and anarchy now prevailed. Dupas, the factotum of the
General-in-chief, a man of no ability, made himself busy, and was
continually meddling with the artillery-men in the arrangement of their
field-train and batteries. A plan was formed to get rid of him. They
turned him into ridicule, and urged each other on till they became very
vehement in their jokes. On a sudden Dupas appeared among them with all
his usual confidence, giving orders and making inquiries about every
thing he saw. He received uncivil answers, and high words arose. The
tumult spread on every side; cries of _l’aristocrate_ and _la lanterne_
were echoed from every mouth; and Dupas clapped both spurs to his horse,
and never returned to annoy them.

The commandant of artillery was to be seen every where. His activity and
knowledge gave him a decided influence over the rest of the army.
Whenever the enemy attempted to make a sortie, or compelled the
besiegers to have recourse to rapid and unexpected movements, the heads
of columns and detachments were always sure to exclaim, “Run to the
commandant of artillery, and ask him what we are to do; he understands
the localities better than any one.” This advice was uniformly adopted
without a murmur. He did not spare himself; he had several horses killed
under him, and received from an Englishman a bayonet-wound in his left
thigh, which for a short time, threatened to require amputation.

Being one day in a battery where one of the gunners was killed, he
seized the rammer, and, with his own hands, loaded ten or twelve times.
A few days afterwards he was attacked with a violent cutaneous disease.
No one could conceive where he had caught it, until Muiron, his
adjutant, discovered that the dead gunner had been infected with it. In
the ardour of youth and the activity of service, the commandant of
artillery was satisfied with slight remedies, and the disorder
disappeared; but the poison had only entered the deeper into his system,
it long affected his health, and well nigh cost him his life. From this
disorder proceeded the meagreness, the feebleness of body, and sickly
complexion, which characterized the General-in-chief of the army of
Italy and of the army of Egypt.

It was not till a much later period, at the Tuileries, that Corvisart
succeeded, by the application of numerous blisters on his chest, in
restoring him to perfect health; and it was then that he acquired the
corpulence for which he has since been remarked.

From being the commandant of artillery in the army of Toulon, Napoleon
might have become general-in-chief before the close of the siege. The
very day of the attack on _Little Gibraltar_, General Dugommier, who had
delayed it for some days, wished to delay it still longer; about three
or four o’clock in the afternoon, the Representatives sent for Napoleon:
they were dissatisfied with Dugommier, particularly on account of his
delay; they wished to deprive him of the command, and to transfer it to
the chief of the artillery, who declined accepting it. Napoleon went to
the General, whom he esteemed and loved, informed him of what had
occurred, and persuaded him to decide on the attack. About eight or nine
in the evening, when all the preparations were completed, and just as
the attack was about to commence, a change took place in the state of
affairs, and the Representatives countermanded the attack. Dugommier,
however, still influenced by the commandant of artillery, persisted: had
he failed, he must have forfeited his head. Such was the course of
affairs and the justice of the times.

The notes which the committees of Paris found in the office of the
artillery department, respecting Napoleon, first called their attention
to his conduct at the siege of Toulon. They saw that, in spite of his
youth and the inferiority of his rank, as soon as he appeared there, he
was master.—This was the natural effect of the ascendancy of knowledge,
activity, and energy, over the ignorance and confusion of the moment. He
was, in fact, the conqueror of Toulon, and yet he is scarcely named in
the official despatches. He was in possession of the town before the
army had scarcely dreamt of it. After taking Little Gibraltar, which he
always looked upon as the key of the whole enterprise, he said to old
Dugommier, who was worn out with fatigue,—“Go and rest yourself—we have
taken Toulon—you may sleep there the day after to-morrow.” When
Dugommier found the thing actually accomplished—when he reflected that
the young commandant of artillery had always foretold exactly what would
happen, he became all enthusiasm and admiration; he was never tired of
praising him. It is perfectly true, as some of the publications of the
period relate, that Dugommier informed the Committees of Paris that he
had with him a young man who merited particular notice; for that,
whichever side he might adopt, he was certainly destined to throw great
weight into the balance. When Dugommier joined the Army of the Eastern
Pyrenees, he wished to take with him the young commandant of artillery;
but this he was unable to do. He, however, spoke of him incessantly:
and, at a subsequent period, when this same army was, on the conclusion
of peace with Spain, sent to re-inforce the army of Italy, of which
Napoleon soon after became general-in-chief, he found on his arrival,
that in consequence of all Dugommier had said of him, the officers had,
to use his own expression, scarcely eyes enough to look at him.

With regard to Napoleon, his success at Toulon did not much astonish
him; he enjoyed it, he says, with a lively satisfaction, unmingled with
surprise. He was equally happy the following year at Saorgio, where his
operations were admirable: he accomplished in a few days what had been
attempted in vain for two years. “Vendemiaire, and even Montenotte,”
said the Emperor, “never induced me to look upon myself as a man of a
superior class; it was not till after Lodi that I was struck with the
possibility of my becoming a decisive actor on the scene of political
events. It was then that the first spark of my ambition was kindled.”
He, however, mentioned that, subsequently to Vendemiaire, during his
command of the Army of the Interior, he drew up the plan of a campaign
which was to terminate by a treaty of peace on the summit of the
Simmering, which plan he shortly afterwards carried into execution at
Leoben. It is, perhaps, still to be found in the official archives. The
well-known fury of the times was still farther increased under the walls
of Toulon, by the assembling of two hundred deputies from the
neighbouring popular associations, who had proceeded thither for the
purpose of instigating the most atrocious measures. To them must be
attributed the excesses which were then committed, and of which the
whole army complained. When Napoleon afterwards rose to distinction,
attempts were made to throw the odium of these atrocities on him. “It
would be a degradation,” said the Emperor, “to think of replying to such
calumnies.”

As soon as Napoleon took the command of the artillery at Toulon, he
availed himself of the necessity of circumstances to procure the return
of many of his old companions, who had, at first, left the service on
account of their birth or political principles. He obtained the
appointment of Col. Gassendi to the command of the arsenal of
Marseilles. The obstinacy and severity of this man are well known: they
frequently placed him in danger: it more than once required all
Napoleon’s vigilance and care to save him from the effects of the
irritation which his conduct excited.

The ascendancy which Napoleon had acquired, through his services, in the
port and arsenal of Toulon, afforded him the means of saving several
unfortunate members of the emigrant family of Chabriant, or Chabrillan,
who had been overtaken by storms at sea, and driven on the French shore.
They were about to be put to death, for the law was decisive against
emigrants who might return to France. They urged, in their defence, that
their return had been purely the effect of accident, and was contrary to
their own wishes; the only favour they solicited was to be permitted to
depart; but all was vain: they would have perished, had not the
Commandant of the Artillery hazarded his own safety, and procured for
them a covered boat, which he sent off from the French coast under the
pretence of business relative to his department. During the reign of
Napoleon, these individuals took an opportunity of expressing their
gratitude to him, and informing him that they had carefully preserved
the order which saved their lives.

Napoleon was himself, at various times, exposed to the fury of
revolutionary assassins.—Whenever he established a new battery, the
numerous patriotic deputations, who were at the camp, solicited the
honour of having it named after them. Napoleon named one ‘the battery of
the Patriots of the South:’ this was a sufficient ground for his being
denounced and accused of federalism; and had he been a less useful
person, he would have been put under arrest, or, in other words, he
would have been sacrificed. In short, language is inadequate to describe
the frenzy and horror of the times. For instance, the Emperor told us
that, while engaged in fortifying the coasts at Marseilles, he was a
witness to the horrible condemnation of the merchant Hugues, a man of
eighty-four years of age, deaf and nearly blind. In spite of his age and
infirmities, his atrocious executioners pronounced him guilty of
conspiracy: his real crime was his being worth eighteen millions. This
he was himself aware of, and he offered to surrender his wealth to the
tribunal, provided he might be allowed to retain five hundred thousand
francs, which, he said, he should not live long to enjoy. But this
proposition was rejected, and his head was cut off. “At this sight,”
said Napoleon, “I thought the world was at an end!” an expression he was
accustomed to employ on any extraordinary occasion. Barras and Fréron
were the authors of these atrocities. The Emperor did Robespierre the
justice to say that he had seen long letters written by him to his
brother, Robespierre the younger, who was then a representative with the
army of the South, in which he warmly opposed and disclaimed these
excesses, declaring that they would disgrace and ruin the Revolution.

Napoleon, when at Toulon, formed friendships with many individuals, who
subsequently became very celebrated. He distinguished in the train a
young officer, whose talents he had at first much difficulty in
cultivating, but from whom he afterwards derived the greatest services:
this was Duroc, who, with a very unprepossessing person, was endowed
with talent of the most solid and useful kind: he loved the Emperor for
himself, was devoted to his interests, and at the same time knew how to
tell him the truth at proper seasons. He was afterwards created Duke de
Frioul and Grand Marshal of the Palace. He placed the Imperial household
on an excellent footing, and preserved the most perfect order. At his
death, the Emperor thought he had sustained an irreparable loss, and
many other persons were of the same opinion. The Emperor told me that
Duroc was the only man who had possessed his intimacy and entire
confidence.

During the erection of one of the first batteries which Napoleon, on his
arrival at Toulon, directed against the English, he asked whether there
was a serjeant, or corporal, present who could write. A man advanced
from the ranks, and wrote by his dictation on the epaulement. The note
was scarcely ended, when a cannon ball which had been fired in the
direction of the battery, fell near the spot, and the paper was
immediately covered by the loose earth thrown up by the ball. “Well,”
said the writer, “I shall have no need of sand.” This remark, together
with the coolness with which it was made, fixed the attention of
Napoleon, and made the fortune of the serjeant. This man was Junot,
afterwards Duke of Abrantes, colonel-general of the Hussars, commandant
in Portugal, and governor-general in Illyria, where he evinced signs of
mental alienation, which increased on his return to France, where he
wounded himself in a horrible way. He died the victim of the
intemperance which destroyed both his health and his reason.

Napoleon, on being created General of Artillery, and Commandant of that
department in the Army of Italy, carried thither all the superiority and
influence which he had acquired before Toulon; still, however, he
experienced reverses, and even dangers. He was put under arrest for a
short time at Nice, by the representative Laporte, because he refused to
crouch to his authority. Another representative pronounced sentence of
outlawry upon him, because he would not suffer him to employ all his
artillery-horses for the posting service. Finally, a decree, which was
never executed, summoned him to the bar of the Convention, for having
proposed certain military measures relative to the fortifications at
Marseilles.

When attached to the Army of Nice or of Italy, he became a great
favourite with the representative Robespierre the younger, whom he
described as possessing qualities very different from his brother: the
latter Napoleon never saw. Robespierre the younger, on being recalled to
Paris by his brother, some time before the 9th of Thermidor, exerted
every endeavour to prevail on Napoleon to accompany him. “If I had not
firmly resisted,” observed the Emperor, “who knows whither this first
step might have led me, and for what a different destiny I might have
been reserved?”

At the Army of Nice, there was another Representative, an insignificant
man. His wife, who was an extremely pretty and fascinating woman, shared
and even usurped his authority; she was a native of Versailles. Both
husband and wife paid great attention to the General of artillery; they
became extremely fond of him, and treated him in the handsomest manner.
This was a great advantage to the young General, for, at that time,
during the absence or the inefficiency of the laws, a representative of
the people was a man of immense power.

The individual here alluded to was one of those who, in the Convention,
most contributed to bring Napoleon into notice, at the crisis of
Vendemiaire: this was the natural consequence of the deep impressions
produced by the character and capacity of the young General.

The Emperor relates that, after he had ascended the throne, he again saw
his old acquaintance the fair representative of Nice. She was so much
altered as to be scarcely recognisable; her husband was dead, and she
was reduced to extreme indigence. The Emperor readily granted every
thing she solicited: “He realized,” he said, “all her dreams, and even
went beyond them.” Although she lived at Versailles, many years had
elapsed before she succeeded in gaining access to him. Letters,
petitions, solicitations of every description had proved unavailing: “So
difficult it is,” said the Emperor, “to reach the sovereign, even when
he does not wish to deny himself.” At length, one day when he was on a
hunting excursion at Versailles, Napoleon happened to mention this lady
to Berthier, who was also a native of that place, and had known her in
her youth; and he, who had never yet deigned to mention her, and still
less to regard her petitions, on the following day presented her to the
sovereign. “But why did you not get introduced to me through our mutual
acquaintances in the Army of Nice?” inquired the Emperor: “many of them
are now great men, and are on a constant footing of intimacy with me.”
“Alas! sire,” replied she, “our acquaintance ceased when they became
great, and I was overtaken by misfortune.”

The Emperor one day communicated to me some details respecting this old
friendship:—“I was,” said he, “very young when I first knew this lady; I
was proud of the favourable impression I had made on her, and seized
every opportunity of shewing her all the attention in my power. I will
mention one circumstance, to shew how authority is sometimes abused, and
on what men’s fate may depend: for I am no worse than the rest. I was
walking one day with the Representative’s wife, inspecting our positions
in the vicinity of the Col di Tende, when I suddenly took it into my
head to give her an idea of an engagement, and, for this purpose,
ordered the attack of an advanced post. We were conquerors, it is true;
but the affair could be attended by no advantage. The attack was a mere
whim, and yet it cost the lives of several men. I have never failed to
reproach myself whenever I look back on this affair.”

The events of Thermidor having produced a change in the Committees of
the Convention, Aubry, formerly a captain of artillery, was appointed to
direct the Committee of War, and he re-modelled the army. He did not
forget himself; he promoted himself to the rank of general of artillery,
and favoured several of his old comrades, to the injury of the inferior
officers, whom he dismissed. Napoleon, who was at this time scarcely
twenty-five years of age, became a general of infantry, and he was
chosen for the service of La Vendée. This circumstance induced him to
quit the Army of Italy, in order to protest earnestly against the
change, which, on every account, was unsatisfactory to him. Finding
Aubry inflexible, and even offended at his just representations, he gave
in his resignation. Only a short time elapsed before he was again
employed in the Topographical Committee, by which the movements of the
army and the plans of the campaigns were arranged: he was thus engaged
at the period of the 13th of Vendemiaire.

Napoleon’s expostulation with Aubry on the subject of his new
appointment formed a perfect scene: he insisted vehemently, because he
had facts to bear him out; Aubry was obstinate and bitter, because he
had power in his hands. He told Napoleon that he was too young, and that
he must let older men go before him; Napoleon replied that a soldier
soon grew old on the field of battle, and that _he_ had just come from
it. Aubry had never been in any engagement. They came to very high
words.

I informed the Emperor that, on returning from my emigration, I occupied
for a considerable time, in the Rue Saint Florentin, the identical
apartment in which this scene took place. I had frequently heard it
spoken of; and though it was described by unfriendly tongues, each,
nevertheless, took great interest in relating the details, and in trying
to guess the part of the room in which any particular gesture was made,
or any remarkable word spoken.

The history of the famous day of Vendemiaire, which had so important an
influence on the fate of the Revolution and of Napoleon, will shew that
he hesitated for some time before he undertook the defence of the
Convention.

On the night succeeding that day, Napoleon presented himself to the
Committee of Forty, which was established at the Tuileries. He wanted to
procure mortars and ammunition from Meudon; but such was the
circumspection of the President (Cambacéres) that, in spite of the
dangers which had marked the day, he refused to sign the order; and
merely, by way of accommodating the matter, requested that the guns and
ammunition might be placed at the disposal of the General.

During his command of Paris, subsequently to the 13th of Vendemiaire,
Napoleon had to encounter a great scarcity, which occasioned several
popular commotions. One day when the usual distribution had not taken
place, crowds of people collected round the bakers’ shops. Napoleon was
parading about the city with a party of his staff to preserve public
tranquillity. A crowd of persons, chiefly women, assembled round him,
loudly calling for bread. The crowd augmented, the outcries increased,
and the situation of Napoleon and his officers became critical. A woman,
of monstrous size and corpulence, was particularly conspicuous by her
gestures and exclamations. “Those fine epauletted fellows,” said she,
pointing to the officers, “laugh at our distress: so long as they can
eat and grow fat, they care not if the poor people die of hunger.”
Napoleon turned to her, and said, “Good woman, look at me; which is
fatter, you or I?” Napoleon was at that time extremely thin: “I was a
mere slip of parchment,” said he. A general burst of laughter disarmed
the fury of the populace, and the staff-officers continued their round.

The narrative of the thirteenth of Vendemiaire shews how Napoleon became
acquainted with Madame de Beauharnais, and how he contracted the
marriage which has been so greatly misrepresented in the accounts of the
time. As soon as he got introduced to Madame de Beauharnais, he spent
almost every evening at her house, which was frequented by the most
agreeable company in Paris. When the majority of the party retired,
there usually remained M. de Montesquiou, the father of the Grand
Chamberlain; the Duke de Nivernois, so celebrated for the graces of his
wit; and a few others. They used to look round to see that the doors
were all shut, and they would then say, “Let us sit down and chat about
the old court; let us make a tour to Versailles.”

The poverty of the treasury and the scarcity of specie were so great,
during the Republic, that, on the departure of General Buonaparte for
the army of Italy, all his efforts, joined to those of the Directory,
could only succeed in raising 2000 louis, which he carried with him in
his carriage. With this sum he set out to conquer Italy, and to march
towards the empire of the world. The following is a curious fact: an
order of the day was published, signed Berthier, directing the
General-in-chief, on his arrival at the head-quarters at Nice, to
distribute to the different generals, to enable them to enter on the
campaign, the sum of four louis in specie. For a considerable time no
such thing as specie had been seen. This order of the day displays the
circumstances of the times more truly and faithfully than whole volumes
written on the subject.

As soon as Napoleon joined the army, he proved himself to be a man born
for command. From that moment he filled the theatre of the world;[17] he
occupied all Europe; he was a meteor blazing in the firmament; he
concentrated all attention, riveted all thoughts, and formed the subject
of all conversations. From that time every Gazette, every publication,
every monument, became the record of his deeds. His name was inscribed
in every page and in every line, and echoed from every mouth.

Footnote 17:

                      CHRONOLOGICAL RECAPITULATION.

   The Emperor was born                                 Aug. 15, 1769
   Entered the military school of Brienne                        1779
   Transferred to the school of Paris                            1783
   Lieutenant in the 1st Artillery regiment of
   la Fère                                              Sept. 1, 1785
   Captain                                              Feb.  6, 1792
   Chief of Battalion                                   Oct. 19, 1793
   General of Brigade                                   Feb.  6, 1794
   General of Division                                  Oct. 16, 1795
   General-in-Chief of the army of the Interior         Oct. 26, 1795
   General-in-Chief of the army of Italy                Feb. 23, 1796
   First Consul                                         Dec. 13, 1799
   Consul for life                                      Aug.  2, 1802
   Emperor                                              May  18, 1804
   Crowned                                              Dec.  2, 1804
   First abdication at Fontainbleau                    April 11, 1814
   Resumed the reins of government                      Mar. 20, 1815
   Second abdication at l’Elysée                        June 21, 1815

On his appearance in the command, a total revolution was observed in his
manners, conduct, and language. Decrès has often told me that he was at
Toulon when he first heard of Napoleon’s appointment to the command of
the army of Italy. He had known him well in Paris, and thought himself
on terms of perfect familiarity with him. “Thus,” said he, “when we
learned that the new General was about to pass through the city, I
immediately proposed to all my comrades to introduce them to him,
priding myself on my intimacy with him. I hastened to him, full of
eagerness and joy; the door of the apartment was thrown open, and I was
on the point of rushing towards him with my wonted familiarity, but his
attitude, his look, the tone of his voice, suddenly deterred me. There
was nothing offensive either in his appearance or manner; but the
impression he produced was sufficient to prevent me from ever again
attempting to encroach upon the distance that separated us.”

Napoleon’s generalship was, moreover, characterized by the skill,
energy, and purity of his military administration; his constant hatred
of peculation of any kind, and his total disregard of his own private
interest. “When I returned from the campaign of Italy,” said he, “I had
not 300,000 francs in my possession. I might easily have brought back 10
or 12 millions; that sum might have been mine. I never made out any
accounts, nor was I ever asked for any. I expected on my return to
receive some great national reward. It was publicly reported that
Chambord was to be given to me, and I should have been very glad to have
had it: but the idea was set aside by the Directory. I had, however,
transmitted to France at least 50,000,000 for the service of the State.
This I imagine, was the first instance in modern history of an army
contributing to maintain the country to which it belonged, instead of
being a burthen on it.”

When Napoleon was in treaty with the Duke de Modena, Salicetti, the
Government Commissary with the army, who had hitherto been on
indifferent terms with him, entered his cabinet.—“The Commander d’Este,”
said he, “the Duke’s brother, is here with four millions in gold,
contained in four chests. He comes in the name of his brother to beg of
you to accept them, and I advise you to do so. I am a countryman of
yours, and I know your family affairs. The Directory and the Legislative
Body will never acknowledge your services. This money belongs to you;
take it without scruple and without publicity. A proportionate
diminution will be made in the Duke’s contribution, and he will be very
glad to have gained a protector.”—“I thank you,” coolly answered
Napoleon: “I shall not for that sum place myself in the power of the
Duke de Modena:—I wish to continue free.”

A Commissary-in-chief of the same army used often to relate that he had
witnessed an offer of seven millions in gold made in a like manner to
Napoleon by the Government of Venice, to save it from destruction, which
offer was refused.—The Emperor smiled at the transports of admiration
evinced by this financier, to whom the refusal of his General appeared
super-human—an action much more difficult and noble than the gaining of
victories. The Emperor dwelt with a certain degree of complacency on
these anecdotes of his disinterestedness. He however observed that he
had been in the wrong, and that such a course of conduct was the most
improvident he could have pursued, whether his intention had been to
make himself the head of a party, and to acquire influence, or to remain
in the station of a private individual; for, on his return, he found
himself almost destitute: and he might have continued in a career of
absolute poverty, while his inferior generals and commissaries were
amassing large fortunes. “But,” added he, “if my commissary had seen me
accept the bribe, who can tell to what lengths he might have gone? My
refusal was at least a check upon him.

“When I was placed at the head of affairs, as Consul, it was only by
setting an example of disinterestedness, and employing the utmost
vigilance, that I could succeed in changing the conduct of the
Administration, and putting a stop to the dreadful spectacle of
Directorial peculations. It cost me an immense deal of trouble to
overcome the inclinations of the first persons in the State, whose
conduct, under me, at length became strict and irreproachable. I was
obliged to keep them constantly in fear. How often did I not repeat, in
my councils, that if my own brother were found to be in fault, I should
not hesitate to dismiss him!”

No man in the world ever had more wealth at his disposal, and
appropriated less to himself.—Napoleon, according to his own account,
possessed as much as four hundred millions of specie in the cellars of
the Tuileries. His extraordinary domain amounted to more than seven
hundred millions. He has said that he distributed upwards of five
hundred millions in endowments to the army. And, what is very
extraordinary, he who circulated such heaps of wealth, never possessed
any private property of his own! He had collected, in the Museum,
treasures which it was impossible to estimate, and yet he never had a
picture or a curiosity of his own.

On his return from Italy, and on the eve of his departure for Egypt, he
became possessed of Malmaison, and there he deposited nearly all his
property. He purchased it in the name of his wife, who was older than
himself, and consequently, in case of his surviving her, he must have
forfeited all claim to it. The fact is, as he himself has said, that he
never had a taste or a desire for riches.

“If I now possess any thing,”[18] continued he, “it is owing to measures
which have been adopted since my departure: but even in that case it
depended on a hair’s-breadth chance whether there should be any thing in
the world I might call my own or not. But every one has his relative
ideas. I have a taste for founding, and not for possessing. My riches
consisted in glory and celebrity: the Simplon and the Louvre were, in
the eyes of the people and of foreigners, more my property than private
domains could have been. I purchased diamonds for the crown, I repaired
and adorned the Imperial palaces; and I could not help thinking
sometimes that the expenses lavished by Josephine on her green-houses
and her gallery were a real injury to my _Jardin des Plantes_ and my
_Musée de Paris_.”

Footnote 18:

  The deposit at the house of Lafitte.

  On the Emperor’s second abdication, somebody who loved him for his own
  sake, and who knew his improvident disposition, eagerly enquired
  whether any measures had been taken for his future support. Finding
  that no provision had been made, and that Napoleon remained absolutely
  destitute, a contribution was made, and four or five millions were
  raised for him, of which M. Lafitte became the depositary.

  At the moment of his departure from Malmaison, the solicitude of
  Napoleon’s real friends was not less serviceable to him.—An
  individual, aware of the disorder and confusion of our situation,
  wished to ascertain whether the little treasure had been forwarded to
  its destination. What was his astonishment on learning that the
  carriage in which it had been placed was left in a coach-house at
  Malmaison. A new difficulty arose: the key of the coach-house was not
  to be found; and the embarrassment occasioned by this unexpected
  circumstance delayed our departure for some moments. M. Lafitte wished
  immediately to give the Emperor a receipt for the sum; but Napoleon
  would not accept it—saying, “I know you, M. Lafitte—I know that you
  did not approve of my government: but I consider you as an honest
  man.”

  M. Lafitte seems to have been doomed to be the depositary of the funds
  of unfortunate Monarchs. Louis XVIII., on his departure for Ghent,
  also placed a considerable sum of money in his hands. On Napoleon’s
  arrival, on the 20th of March, M. Lafitte was sent for by the Emperor,
  and questioned respecting the deposit, which he did not deny. On his
  expressing his apprehension lest a reproach should be intended to be
  conveyed in the questions which had been put to him;—“None,” said the
  Emperor: “that money belonged personally to the King, and private
  affairs are totally distinct from political matters.”

On taking the command of the army of Italy, Napoleon, notwithstanding
his extreme youth, immediately impressed the troops with a spirit of
subordination, confidence, and the most absolute devotedness. The army
was subdued by his genius, rather than seduced by his popularity: he was
in general very severe and reserved. During the whole course of his life
he has uniformly disdained to court the favour of the multitude by
unworthy means; perhaps he has even carried this feeling to an extent
which may have been injurious to him. A singular custom was established
in the army of Italy, in consequence of the youth of the commander, or
from some other cause.—After each battle, the eldest soldiers used to
hold a council, and confer a new rank on their young General, who, when
he made his appearance in the camp, was received by the veterans, and
saluted with his new title. They made him a Corporal at Lodi, and a
Serjeant at Castiglione; and hence the surname of “_Petit Caporal_,”
which was for a long time applied to Napoleon by the soldiers. How
subtle is the chain which unites the most trivial circumstances to the
most important events! Perhaps this very nick-name contributed to his
miraculous success on his return in 1815.—While he was haranguing the
first battalion he met, which he found it necessary to parley with, a
voice from the ranks exclaimed, “_Vive notre petit_ _Caporal!_ we will
never fight against him!”

The administration of the Directory, and that of the General-in-chief of
the army of Italy, seemed two distinct Governments. The Directory in
France put the emigrants to death: the army of Italy never inflicted
capital punishment on any one of them. The Directory, on learning that
Wurmser was besieged in Mantua, went so far as to write to Napoleon, to
remind him that he was an emigrant; but Napoleon, on making him
prisoner, eagerly sought to render an affecting homage of respect to his
old age. The Directory adopted the most insulting forms in communicating
with the Pope: the General of the army of Italy addressed him by the
words “Most Holy Father,” and wrote to him with respect. The Directory
endeavoured to overthrow the authority of the Pope: Napoleon preserved
it. The Directory banished and proscribed Priests: Napoleon commanded
his soldiers, wherever they might fall in with them, to remember that
they were Frenchmen and their brothers. The Directory would have
exterminated every vestige of aristocracy; Napoleon wrote to the
democracy of Genoa, blaming their violence; and did not hesitate to
declare that, if the Genoese attached any value to the preservation of
his esteem, they must learn to respect the statue of Doria, and the
institutions to which they were indebted for their glory.

                    THE EMPEROR DETERMINES TO WRITE
                              HIS MEMOIRS.

7th—9th. We continued our course, and nothing occurred to interrupt the
uniformity which surrounded us. Our days were all alike; the correctness
of my journal alone informed me of the day of the week or of the month.
Fortunately my time was employed, and therefore the day usually slipped
on with a certain degree of facility. The materials which I collected in
the afternoon conversation employed me so as to leave no idle time until
next day.

Meanwhile the Emperor observed that I was very much occupied, and he
even suspected the subject on which I was engaged. He determined to
ascertain the fact, and obtained sight of a few pages of my journal: he
was not displeased with it. Having alluded several times to the subject,
he observed that such a work would be interesting rather than useful.
The military events, for example, thus detailed in the ordinary course
of conversation, would be meagre, incomplete, and devoid of end or
object: they would be mere anecdotes, frequently of the most puerile
kind, instead of grand operations and results. I eagerly seized the
favourable opportunity: I entirely concurred in his opinion, and
ventured to suggest the idea of his dictating to me the campaigns of
Italy. “It would,” I observed, “be a benefit to the country—a true
monument of national glory. Our time is unemployed, our hours are
tedious; occupation will help to divert us, and some moments may not be
devoid of pleasure.” This idea became the subject of various
conversations.

At length the Emperor came to a determination, and on Saturday, the 9th
of September, he called me into his cabin, and dictated to me, for the
first time, some details respecting the siege of Toulon.

                         TRADE-WIND.—THE LINE.

10th—13th. On approaching the Line, we met with what are called the
trade winds, that is to say, winds blowing constantly from the east.
Science explains this phenomenon in a way sufficiently satisfactory.
When a vessel sailing from Europe first encounters these winds, they
blow from the north-east; in proportion as the ship approaches the Line,
the winds become more easterly. Calms are generally to be apprehended
under the Line. When the Line is crossed, the winds gradually change to
the south, until they blow in the direction of the south-east. At
length, after passing the tropics, the trade-winds are lost, and
variable winds are met with, as in our European regions. A ship sailing
from Europe to St. Helena is always driven in a westerly direction by
these constant easterly winds. It would be very difficult to gain that
island by a direct course; and, indeed, this is never attempted. The
ship stands away to the variable winds in the southern latitude, and
then shapes her course towards the Cape of Good Hope, so as to fall in
with the trade-winds from the south-east, which bring her, with the wind
astern, to St. Helena.

Two different courses are taken to gain the variable winds of the
southern latitudes; the one is to cross the Line about the 20th or 24th
degree of longitude, reckoning from the meridian of London: those who
prefer this course affirm that it is less exposed to the equatorial
calms, and that, though it frequently has the disadvantage of carrying
the vessel within sight of Brazil, yet it enables her to make that part
of her voyage in a short time. Admiral Cockburn, who was inclined to
regard this course as a prejudice and a routine, determined in favour of
the second method, which consisted in steering more to the east; and,
following particular examples with which he was acquainted, he
endeavoured to cross the Line about the 2nd or 3rd degrees of longitude.
He doubted not that, standing towards the variable winds, he should pass
sufficiently near St. Helena to shorten his passage considerably, even
if he should not succeed in reaching the island by tacking without
leaving the trade-winds.

The winds, to our great astonishment, veered to the west, (a
circumstance which the Admiral informed us was more common than we
supposed) and this tended to favour his opinion. He abandoned the bad
sailers of his squadron, in proportion as they lagged behind: and he
determined on gaining the place of his destination with all possible
speed.

              A STORM.—EXAMINATION OF CERTAIN LIBELS UPON
                   THE EMPEROR.—GENERAL REFLECTIONS.

14th-18th. After a few slight gales and several calms, we had on the
16th a considerable fall of rain, to the great joy of the crew. The heat
was very moderate; it may, indeed, be said that, with the exception of
the storm at Madeira, we had uniformly enjoyed mild weather. But water
was very scarce on board the ship; and, for the sake of economy, the
crew took advantage of the opportunity of collecting the rain water, of
which each sailor laid by a little store for his own use. The rain fell
heavily just as the Emperor had got upon deck to take his afternoon
walk. But this did not disappoint him of his usual exercise; he merely
called for his famous grey great coat, which the English regarded with
deep interest. The Grand Marshal and I attended the Emperor in his walk.
The rain descended heavily for upwards of an hour; when the Emperor left
the deck, I had great difficulty in stripping off my wet clothes; almost
every thing I wore was soaked through.

For several succeeding days the weather continued very rainy; this
somewhat impeded my labours, for the damp penetrated into our wretched
little cabin; and on the other hand, it was not very agreeable to walk
on deck. This was the first time during our passage that we had had any
thing like a continuance of wet weather; and it quite disconcerted us. I
filled up the intervals, between my hours of occupation, in conversing
with the officers of the ship. I was not on intimate terms with any of
them; but I kept up a daily intercourse of civility and politeness to
them all. They loved to talk with us on French affairs, and their
ignorance of all that concerned France and the French people was almost
incredible. We excited mutual astonishment in each other: they surprised
us by their degenerate political principles, and we astonished them by
our new ideas and manners, of which they had previously formed no
conception. They certainly knew infinitely less of France than of China.

One of the principal officers of the ship, in a familiar conversation,
happened to say—“I suppose you would be very much alarmed if we were to
land you on the coast of France?”—“Why so?” I enquired.—“Because,”
replied he, “the King would perhaps make you pay dearly for having left
your country to follow another Sovereign; and also because you wear a
cockade which he has prohibited.”—“And is this language becoming an
Englishman?” observed I. “You must be degenerate indeed! You are, it is
true, far removed from the period of your revolution, to which you so
justly apply the epithet _glorious_. But we, who are nearer to ours, by
which we have gained so much, may tell you that every word you say is
heresy. In the first place, our punishment depends not on the King’s
pleasure; we are subject only to the law. Now, there exists no law
against us; and if any law were to be violated for the purpose of
applying to our case, it would be your duty to protect us. Your general
has pledged himself to do so by the capitulation of Paris; and it would
be an eternal disgrace to the English Ministry were they to permit the
sacrifice of lives which their public faith had solemnly guaranteed.

“In the next place, we are not following another sovereign. That the
Emperor Napoleon was our sovereign is an undeniable fact; but he has
abdicated, and his reign is at an end. You are confounding private
actions with party measures; love and devotedness, with political
opinions. Finally, with regard to our colours, which seem to have
dazzled you so much, they are but a remnant of our old costume. We wear
them to-day, only because we wore them yesterday. One cannot with
indifference lay aside things to which one is attached; that can only be
done from constraint or necessity. Why did you not deprive us of our
colours when you deprived us of our arms?—the one act would have been as
reasonable as the other. We are here only as private men; we do not
preach sedition. We cannot deny that these colours are dear to us: we
are attached to them because they have seen us victorious over all our
enemies; because we have paraded them in triumph through every capital
in Europe; and because we wore them while we were the first nation in
the world.”

On another occasion, one of the officers, after glancing at the
extraordinary vicissitude of recent events, said—“Who knows whether we
may not yet be destined to repair the misfortunes which we have
occasioned to you? What would be your astonishment if Wellington should
one day conduct Napoleon back to Paris?”—“I should be astonished
indeed,” I replied: “but I should certainly decline the honour of being
one of the party: at such a price, I would not hesitate to abandon
Napoleon himself! But I may rest easy on that score; for I can swear
Napoleon will never put me to such a trial. It is from him I imbibe
these sentiments: it was he who cured me of the contrary doctrine, which
I call the error of my youth.”

The English were very fond of asking us questions concerning the
Emperor, whose character and disposition, as they afterwards avowed, had
been represented to them in the falsest colours. It was not their fault,
they observed, if they formed an erroneous estimate of his character:
they knew him only through the works published in England, which were
all greatly exaggerated, and much to his prejudice: they had several of
these publications on board the ship.—One day I happened to cast my eyes
on one of a most malignant character: on another occasion, when I was
about to look at a book which one of the officers was reading, he
suddenly closed it, observing it was so violent against the Emperor that
he could not prevail on himself to let me see it. Another time, the
Admiral questioned me respecting certain imputations contained in
different works in his library, some of which he said enjoyed a degree
of credit, while all had produced a great sensation, in England. This
circumstance suggested to me the idea of successively examining all the
works of this kind that were on board the ship, in order to note down my
opinion of them in my journal—conceiving that so favourable an
opportunity might never again occur of obtaining, if I chose,
information on those points which it might be worth while to enquire
into.

Before I commence my review of these works, I must beg to offer a few
general remarks: they will suffice to answer by anticipation many of the
numberless accusations that will fall in my way. Calumny and falsehood
are the arms of the civil or political, the foreign or domestic enemy.
They are the resource of the vanquished and the feeble, of those who are
governed by hatred or fear.—They are the food of the drawing-room, and
the garbage of the public place: they rage with the greater fury in
proportion as their object is exalted: there is nothing which they will
not venture to promulgate. The more absurd, ridiculous, and incredible
calumnies and falsehoods may be, the more eagerly are they received and
repeated from mouth to mouth. Triumph and success are but fresh causes
of irritation: a moral storm will invariably gather; and, bursting in
the moment of adversity, it will precipitate and complete the fall, and
become the immense lever of public opinion.

No man was ever so much assailed and abused as Napoleon. No individual
was ever the subject of so many pamphlets, libels, atrocious and absurd
stories and false assertions. Nor could it be otherwise. Napoleon, risen
from the common rank of life to supreme distinction; advancing at the
head of a revolution which he himself had civilized; plunged by these
two circumstances into a deadly contest with the rest of Europe—a
contest in which he was subdued only because he wished to terminate it
too speedily—Napoleon uniting in himself the genius, the force, the
destiny of his own power, the conqueror of his neighbours, and, in some
measure, a universal Monarch—a _Marius_ in the eyes of the aristocrats
of Europe, a _Sylla_ for the demagogues, a _Cæsar_ for the
republicans—could not but raise against himself a hurricane of passions
both at home and abroad.

Despair, policy, and fury, in every country, painted him as an object of
detestation and alarm. Thus, all that has been said against him can
excite no astonishment: it is only surprising that more calumny has not
been uttered, and that it has not produced a much greater effect. When
in the enjoyment of his power, he never would permit any one to reply to
the attacks that were made upon him. “The pains bestowed on such
answers,” said he, “would only have given additional weight to the
accusations they were intended to refute. It would have been said that
all that was written in my defence was ordered and paid for. The
ill-managed praise of those by whom I was surrounded had already, in
some instances, been more prejudicial to me than all the abuse of which
I was the object. Facts were the most convincing answers. A fine
monument, another good law, or a new triumph, were sufficient to defeat
thousands of such falsehoods. Declamation passes away, but deeds
remain!”

This is unquestionably true with regard to posterity. The great men of
former times are handed down to us free from the ephemeral accusations
of their contemporaries. But it is not thus during the lifetime of the
individual; and, in 1814, Napoleon was convinced by cruel experience
that even deeds may vanish before the fury of declamation. At the moment
of his fall, he was absolutely overwhelmed by a torrent of abuse. But it
was reserved for him, whose life had been so fertile in prodigies, to
surmount this adverse stroke of fate, and almost immediately to arise
resplendent from amidst his own ruins. His miraculous return is
certainly unparalleled both in its execution and its results. The
transports which it called forth penetrated into neighbouring countries,
where prayers for his success were offered up either publicly or in
secret; and he who, in 1814, was defeated and pursued as the scourge of
human nature, suddenly re-appeared in 1815 as the hope of his
fellow-creatures.

Calumny and falsehood in this instance lost their prey by having
overshot their mark. The good sense of mankind in a great measure
rendered justice to Napoleon, and the abuse that had been heaped upon
him would not be believed now. “Poison lost its effect on Mithridates,”
said the Emperor, as he was the other day glancing over some new libels
upon himself, “and, since 1814, calumny cannot injure me.”

In the universal clamour which was directed against him when in the
enjoyment of his power, England bore the most conspicuous part.

In England two great machines were maintained in full activity; the one
conducted by the emigrants, for whom nothing was too bad; and the other
under the control of the English ministers, who had established a system
of defamation, and who had regularly organized its action and effects.
They maintained in their pay pamphleteers and libelists in every corner
of Europe; their tasks were marked out to them: and their plans of
attack were regularly laid and combined.

The English ministry multiplied the employment of these potent engines
in England more than elsewhere. The English, who were more free and
enlightened than other nations, stood the more in need of excitement.
From this system the English ministers derived the two-fold advantage of
rousing public opinion against the common enemy, and withdrawing
attention from their own conduct by directing popular clamour and
indignation to the character and conduct of others: by this means their
own character and conduct were screened from that investigation and
recrimination which they might not have found very agreeable. Thus the
assassination of Paul at St. Petersburgh, and of our envoys in Persia;
the seizure of Napper-Tandy in the free city of Hamburgh; the capture,
in time of peace, of two rich Spanish frigates; the acquisition of the
whole of India; the retaining of Malta and the Cape of Good Hope,
against the faith of treaties: the Machiavelian rupture of the treaty of
Amiens; the unjust seizure of our ships previously to a new declaration
of war: the Danish fleet seized with such cold and ironical perfidy, &c.
&c.; all these aggressions were overlooked in the general agitation
which had been artfully stirred up against a foreign power.

In order to take a just view of the accusations which have been heaped
upon Napoleon, by the numerous publications written against him, it is
necessary to make allowance for passions and circumstances; to reject
with contempt all that is apocryphal, anonymous, and purely declamatory;
and to adhere solely to the facts and proofs which would doubtless have
been produced by those who, after the overthrow of their enemy, became
possessed of the authentic documents, the archives of the public
departments and courts of law, in short, of all the sources of truth
which are usually to be found in society. But nothing has been
published; nothing has been brought forward; and, therefore, how much of
this monstrous scaffolding falls to the ground. And to be still more
rigidly equitable, if we wish to judge Napoleon by the example of his
peers, or great men in analogous circumstances; that is to say, by
comparing him with the founders of dynasties, or those who have ascended
thrones by dint of popular commotions, it may then confidently be said
that he is unequalled, and that he shines purely from amidst all that is
opposed to him. It would be a loss of time to cite the numberless
examples furnished by ancient and modern history: they are accessible to
every one. It is only necessary to refer to the two countries which are
here under consideration.

Did Napoleon, like Hugues Capet, fight against his sovereign? Did he
cause him to perish in captivity?

Did Napoleon act like the princes of the present house of Brunswick,
who, in 1715 and 1745, crowded the scaffold with victims—victims to whom
the present English ministers, through their inconsequential policy and
the principles they now profess, leave no other title than that of
faithful subjects dying for their lawful sovereign?

The course by which Napoleon advanced to supreme power is perfectly
simple and natural; it is single in history; the very circumstances of
his elevation render it unparalleled. “I did not usurp the crown,” said
he one day to the Council of State, “I took it up out of the mire; the
people placed it on my head: let their acts be respected!”

And by thus taking up the crown, Napoleon restored France to her rank in
European society, terminated her horrors, and revived her character. He
freed us of all the evils of our fatal crisis, and reserved to us all
the advantages arising out of it. “I ascended the throne unsullied by
any of the crimes of my situation,” said he, on one occasion. “How few
founders of dynasties can say as much!”

Never, during any period of our history, were favours distributed with
so much impartiality; never was merit so indiscriminately sought out and
rewarded; public money so usefully employed; the arts and sciences
better encouraged, or the glory and lustre of the country raised to so
high a pitch. “It is my wish,” said he one day to the Council of State,
“that the title of Frenchman should be the best and most desirable on
earth; that a Frenchman travelling through any part of Europe may think
and find himself at home.”

If liberty seemed occasionally to suffer encroachments, if authority
seemed sometimes to overstep its limits, circumstances rendered those
measures necessary and inevitable. Our present misfortunes have, though
too late, made us sensible of this truth; we now render justice, though
also too late, to the courage, judgment, and foresight which then
dictated those steps. It is certain that in this respect the political
fall of Napoleon has considerably increased his influence. Who can now
doubt that his glory and the lustre of his character have been
infinitely augmented by his misfortunes?

If the works which have fallen in my way should present any
circumstances connected with these general considerations, they will be
the object of my particular attention. I do not intend to enter upon a
political controversy; I shall not address myself to party men, whose
opinions are founded on their interests and passions; I speak only to
the cool friend of truth, or to the unprejudiced writer, who in future
times may impartially seek for materials: to them alone I address
myself; in their eyes my testimony will be superior to anonymous
evidence, and will rank with that which bears a credible character.

The first work that I looked into was the _Anti-Gallican_, of which I
shall speak hereafter.

                        EMPLOYMENT OF OUR TIME.

19th-22nd. We continued our course with the same wind, the same sky, and
the same temperature. Our voyage was monotonous, but pleasant; our days
were long, but employment helped them to glide away. The Emperor now
began regularly to dictate to me his Campaigns of Italy. I had already
written several chapters. For the first few days, the Emperor viewed
this occupation with indifference; but the regularity and promptitude
with which I presented to him my daily task, together with the progress
we made, soon excited his interest, and at length the pleasure he
derived from this dictation rendered it absolutely necessary to him. He
was sure to send for me about eleven o’clock every morning, and he
seemed himself to await the hour with impatience. I always read to him
what he had dictated on the preceding day, and he then made corrections
and dictated farther. In this way the time passed rapidly till four
o’clock arrived, when he summoned his valet-de-chambre. He then
proceeded to the state-cabin, and passed the time until dinner in
playing at piquet or chess.

The Emperor dictates very rapidly, almost as fast as he speaks in
ordinary conversation. I was therefore obliged to invent a kind of
hieroglyphic writing: and I, in my turn, dictated to my son. I was happy
enough to be able to collect almost literally every sentence that fell
from him. I had now not a moment to spare; at dinner time somebody was
sure to come and tell me that all the company were seated at table.
Fortunately my seat was near the door, which always stood open. I had
some time since changed my place at the request of Captain Ross, the
commander of the vessel, who, as he did not speak French, took the
opportunity of occasionally asking me the meaning of words: I therefore
took my seat between him and the Grand Marshal. Captain Ross was a man
of agreeable manners, and was exceedingly kind and attentive to us. I
had learnt, according to the English custom, to invite him to take a
glass of wine, drinking mine to the health of his wife, and he would
then drink to the health of mine. This was our daily practice.

After dinner, the Emperor never failed to allude to his morning
dictation, as if pleased with the occupation and amusement it had
afforded him. On these occasions, as well as whenever I happened to meet
him in the course of the day, he would address me in a jocular tone
with: “Ah! sage Las Cases!—Illustrious memorialist!—the Sully of St.
Helena;” and other similar expressions. Then he would frequently add:
“My dear Las Cases, these Memoirs will be as celebrated as any that have
preceded them. You will survive as long as any previous memoir-writer.
It will be impossible to dwell upon the great events of our time, or to
write about me, without referring to you.” Then resuming his pleasantry,
he would add: “After all, it will be said, he must have known Napoleon
well; he was his Councillor of State, his Chamberlain, his faithful
companion. We cannot help believing him, for he was an honest man and
incapable of misrepresentation.”

        ACCIDENTAL PHENOMENON.—PASSAGE OF THE LINE.—CHRISTENING.

23rd–25th. The West wind still continued, to our great astonishment; it
was a sort of phenomenon in these regions, and had hitherto been very
much in our favour. But, with regard to phenomena, chance produced one
of a much more extraordinary kind on the 23rd, when we crossed the Line
in 0° latitude 0° longitude, and 0° declination. This is a circumstance
which chance alone may perhaps renew only once in a century, since it is
necessary to arrive precisely at the first meridian about noon, in order
to pass the Line at that same hour, and to arrive there at the same time
with the sun.

This was a day of great merriment and disorder among the crew: it was
the ceremony which our sailors call _the Christening_, and which the
English call _the great Shaving day_. The sailors dress themselves up in
the most grotesque way; one is disguised as Neptune, and all persons on
board the ship who have not previously crossed the Line, are formally
presented to him; an immense razor is passed over their chins, with a
lather made of pitch; buckets of water are thrown over them, and the
loud bursts of laughter which accompany their retreat complete their
initiation into the grand mystery. No one is spared; and the officers
are generally more roughly used than the lowest of the sailors. The
Admiral, who had previously amused himself by endeavouring to alarm us
with the anticipation of this awful ceremony, now very courteously
exempted us from the inconvenience and ridicule attending it. We were,
with every mark of attention and respect, presented to the rude god, who
paid to each of us a compliment after his own fashion: and thus our
trial ended.

The Emperor was scrupulously respected during the whole of this
Saturnalian festivity, when respect is usually shewn to no one. On being
informed of the decorum which had been observed with respect to him, he
ordered a hundred Napoleons to be distributed to the grotesque Neptune
and his crew, which the Admiral opposed, perhaps from motives of
prudence as well as politeness.

EXAMINATION OF THE ANTI-GALLICAN.—SIR ROBERT WILSON’S WRITINGS.—PLAGUE
    AT JAFFA.—ANECDOTES OF THE FRENCH ARMY IN EGYPT.—FEELINGS OF THE
    ARMY IN THE EGYPTIAN CAMPAIGN.—BERTHIER.—JESTS OF THE
    SOLDIERY.—DROMEDARIES.—DEATH OF KLEBER.—THE YOUNG ARAB.—SINGULAR
    COINCIDENCES RESPECTING PHILIPEAUX AND NAPOLEON.—CIRCUMSTANCES ON
    WHICH THE FATE OF INDIVIDUALS DEPENDS.—CAFFARELLI’S ATTACHMENT TO
    NAPOLEON.—REPUTATION OF THE FRENCH ARMY IN THE EAST.—NAPOLEON
    QUITTING EGYPT TO ASSUME THE GOVERNMENT OF FRANCE.—THE ENGLISH
    EXPEDITION.—KLEBER AND DESAIX.

26th—30th. The weather still continued favourable. Having passed the
Line, we momentarily expected to fall in with an east or south-east
wind. The continuance of the west wind was extraordinary, and it was
impossible it could last much longer. The resolution which the Admiral
had adopted of bearing considerably to the east rendered our situation
very favourable, and we had every reason to hope for a short passage.

One afternoon, the sailors caught an enormous shark. The Emperor
enquired the cause of the great noise and confusion which he suddenly
heard overhead; being informed of what had occurred, he expressed a wish
to have a sight of the sea-monster. He accordingly went up to the poop,
and incautiously approached too near the animal, which by a sudden
movement knocked down four or five of the sailors, and had well nigh
broken the Emperor’s legs. He went below with his left stocking covered
with blood: we thought he was severely hurt, but it proved to be only
the blood of the shark.

My labours advanced with the greatest regularity. The Anti-Gallican,
which was the first work I undertook to read, was a volume of five
hundred pages, comprising all that had been written in England at the
time when that country was menaced with the French invasion. It was the
object of the English government to nationalize opposition to that
attempt, and to rouse the whole nation against her dangerous enemy. The
book contained a collection of public speeches, exhortations, patriotic
appeals of zealous citizens, satirical songs, sarcastic productions, and
highly-coloured newspaper articles, all pouring a torrent of odium and
ridicule upon the French and their First Consul, whose courage, genius,
and power excited the greatest alarm. This was all perfectly natural and
allowable. Productions of this sort are like a shower of arrows thrown
by combatants before they come to a close action: some hit, and some are
carried away by the wind. Such writings will never afford satisfactory
evidence to a man of judgment, and they scarcely merit contradiction.

Pamphleteers are little regarded, because their character is the
antidote of their poison: it is not so with the historian. The latter,
however, degrades himself to a level with the pamphlet-writer when he
departs from the calm dignity and impartiality required for his office,
to indulge in declamation and to steep his pen in gall.

With these feelings I arose from the perusal of the different
productions of Sir Robert Wilson, which I read after the Anti-Gallican.
This writer did us the greater injury, because his talents, his courage,
and his numerous and brilliant services, gave him importance in the eyes
of his countrymen. A circumstance which I am about to state caused the
writings of Sir R. Wilson to be particularly known and spoken of on
board the ship.

Sir Robert had a son among the young midshipmen on board the
Northumberland, and my son, whose similarity of age occasioned him to be
much in the society of these youths, could easily observe the change
which took place in their opinions with respect to us. They were at
first very much prejudiced against us. When the Emperor came on board,
they regarded him as an ogre ready to devour them. But on a better
acquaintance with us, truth soon exercised over them the same influence
which it produced on the rest of the crew. This was, however, at the
expense of young Wilson, who was scouted by his companions, by way of
expiation, as they said, for the stories which his father had
circulated.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

_At this part of the manuscript a great number of pages are struck out;
the reason was explained, on the margin, as follows:_

“I had collected numerous offensive statements from the writings of Sir
Robert Wilson, to which I had perhaps replied with too much bitterness:
a recent circumstance has induced me to suppress this portion of my
journal.

“Sir Robert Wilson has lately acted a conspicuous part in a cause which
does honour to the hearts of all who were concerned in it: I allude to
the saving of Lavalette. Being asked, before a French tribunal, whether
he had not formerly published works respecting our affairs? he replied
in the affirmative, and added that he had stated in them what he _then_
believed to be true. These words are more to the purpose than any thing
I could say; and I therefore hasten to cancel what I have already
written; happy in thus having an opportunity to render justice to Sir
Robert Wilson, on whose sincerity and good intentions I had, in my
indignation, cast reflections.”[19]

Footnote 19:

  After my removal from Longwood, Sir Hudson Lowe, who had seized my
  papers, looked over this Journal, with my permission. He, of course,
  met with parts which were very displeasing to him; and he said to me:
  “What a pretty legacy you are preparing for my children, Count!”—“That
  is not my fault,” replied I; “it depends only on yourself to render it
  otherwise; I shall be happy to have reason to strike out any thing
  respecting you, as I did the other day with regard to Sir Robert
  Wilson.” Upon which he asked me what I had written about Sir Robert,
  and I pointed out the place. After reading all that had been written,
  and my reasons for cancelling it, he said, with a thoughtful and
  mortified air: “Yes, I see; but I can’t tell what to make of it; for I
  know Wilson well, and he has proved himself a warm friend of the
  Bourbons.”

  We leaped for joy when we heard of the deliverance of Lavalette. Some
  one observed, that his deliverer, Wilson, could not be the same
  individual who had written so many offensive things concerning the
  Emperor. “And why not?” said Napoleon. “You know but little of men,
  and the passions that actuate them. What leads you to suppose that Sir
  Robert Wilson is not a man of enthusiasm and violent passions, who
  wrote what he then believed to be true? And while we were enemies we
  contended with each other; but in our present adversity he knows
  better: he may have been abused, and deceived, and may be sorry for
  it; and he is perhaps now as sincere in wishing us well as he formerly
  was in seeking to injure us.”

  Either sagacity or chance so happily led the Emperor to this
  conclusion that it may be said he was enabled to read character at a
  distance. Sir R. Wilson was indeed the man who wrote against Napoleon.
  Vexed to see a great people deprived of their natural rights, he
  reproached the allies as bitterly as though they had imposed chains on
  himself, and no one has manifested stronger indignation at the
  treatment of Napoleon, or testified a more ardent wish to see it end.

I therefore set aside the works of Sir Robert Wilson, and the various
accusations contained in them; I also suppress the numerous refutations
I had collected. I shall merely stop to consider one circumstance which
has been repeated in a hundred different works; the report of which has
been circulated through Europe, and has obtained credit even in France.
I allude to the poisoning of the men infected with the plague at Jaffa.

Certainly nothing can more clearly prove how easily calumny may effect
its object. If the voice of slander be bold and powerful, and can
command numerous echoes, no matter how far probability, reason, common
sense, and truth be violated—the wished-for end is sure to be attained.

A general, a hero, a great man, hitherto respected by fortune, as well
as by mankind, at that moment riveting the attention of three quarters
of the globe, commanding admiration even from his enemies, was suddenly
accused of a crime declared to be unheard-of and unparalleled; of an act
pronounced to be inhuman, atrocious, and cruel; and, what is above all
extraordinary, he could have no possible object in committing that
crime. The most absurd details, the most improbable circumstances, the
most ridiculous episodes were invented, to give a colouring to this
first falsehood. The story was circulated through Europe; malevolence
seized it, and exaggerated its enormity; it was published in every
newspaper; recorded in every book; and thenceforward was looked upon as
an established fact:—indignation was at its height, and clamour
universal. It would have been vain to reason, or to attempt to stem the
torrent, or to shew that no proofs of the fact had been adduced, and
that the story contradicted itself. It would have been vain to bring
forward opposite and incontrovertible evidence—the evidence of those
very medical men who were said to have administered, or to have refused
to administer, the poison. It would have been vain to expose the
unreasonableness of accusing of inhumanity the man who, but a short time
before, had immortalized the hospitals of Jaffa by an act of the
sublimest heroism; risking his own safety by solemnly touching the
troops infected with the plague, to deceive and soothe the imaginations
of the sick men. In vain might it have been urged that the idea of such
a crime could not be affixed on him who, when consulted by the medical
officers as to the expediency of burning or merely washing the clothes
worn by the invalids, and being reminded of the enormous loss attendant
on the former measure, replied;—“Gentlemen, I came here to fix the
attention and to recal the interests of Europe to the centre of the
ancient world, and not with the view of amassing wealth.” In vain would
it have been shewn that there could be no object, no motive whatever,
for this supposed crime. Had the French General any reason to suspect a
design for corrupting his invalids and converting them into
reinforcements against himself? Did he hope that this barbarous act
would completely rid him of the infection? He might have effected that
object equally well by leaving his invalids to be overtaken by the
enemy’s troops, which would moreover have been the means of spreading
the contagion among the latter. It would have been vain to shew that an
unfeeling and selfish chief might have freed himself from all
embarrassment by merely leaving the unfortunate men behind him: they
would have been massacred, it is true; but no one would ever have
thought of addressing a reproach to him.

These and all other arguments would have been vain and useless, so
powerful and infallible are the effects of falsehood and declamation
when the passions of mankind are interested in their propagation. The
imaginary crime was repeated by every mouth, was engraven on every
heart, and to the common mass of mankind it will perhaps for ever
continue a positive and incontrovertible fact.

A circumstance which will not a little surprise those who have yet to
learn how little credit is due to public report, and which will also
serve to shew the errors that may creep into history, is that Marshal
Bertrand, who was himself with the army in Egypt, (though certainly in a
rank which did not enable him to come into immediate contact with the
General-in-chief) firmly believed, up to the period of his residence at
St. Helena, the story of poison having been administered to sixty
invalids. The report was circulated and believed even in our army;
therefore, what answer could be given to those who triumphantly asserted
“It is a fact, I assure you, I have it from officers who served in the
French army at the time?” Nevertheless, the whole story is false. I have
collected the following facts from the highest source, from the mouth of
Napoleon himself.

1st. That the invalids in question, who were infected with the plague,
amounted, according to the report made to the General-in-chief, only to
_seven_ in number.

2nd. That it was not the General-in-chief, but a professional man, who,
at the moment of the crisis, proposed the administering of opium.

3rd. That opium was not administered to a single individual.

4th. That the retreat having been effected slowly, a rear-guard was left
behind in Jaffa for three days.

5th. That, on the departure of the rear-guard, the invalids were all
dead, except one or two, who must have fallen into the hands of the
English.

N.B. Since my return to Paris, having had opportunities of conversing
with those whose situation and profession naturally rendered them the
first actors in the scene—those whose testimony must be considered as
official and authentic, I have had the curiosity to enquire into the
most minute details, and the following is the result of my enquiries.

“The invalids under the care of the Surgeon-in-chief, that is to say,
the wounded, were all, without exception, removed, with the help of the
horses belonging to the staff, not excepting even those of the
General-in-chief, who proceeded for a considerable distance on foot,
like the rest of the army. These, therefore, are quite out of the
question.

“With regard to the rest of the invalids, about twenty in number, who
were under the care of the Physician-in-chief, and who were in an
absolutely desperate condition, totally unfit to be removed, while the
enemy was advancing, it is very true that Napoleon asked the
Physician-in-chief whether it would not be an act of humanity to
administer opium to them. It is also true that the Physician replied,
his business was to cure and not to kill;—an answer which, as it seems
to have reference to an order rather than to a subject of discussion,
has, perhaps, furnished a basis on which slander and falsehood might
invent and propagate the fabrication which has since been circulated on
this subject.

“Finally, the details which I have been able to collect afford me the
following incontestible results:—

“1st. That no order was given for the administering of opium to the
sick.

“2nd. That there was not at the period in question, in the
medicine-chest of the army, a single grain of opium for the use of the
sick.

“3rd. That even had the order been given, and had there been a supply of
opium, temporary and local circumstances, which it would be tedious to
enumerate here, would have rendered its execution impossible.

“The following circumstances have probably helped to occasion, and may,
perhaps, in some degree excuse, the mistake of those who have
obstinately maintained the truth of the contrary facts. Some of our
wounded men, who had been put on board ship, fell into the hands of the
English. We had been short of medicines of all kinds in the camp, and we
had supplied the deficiency by compositions formed from indigenous trees
and plants. The draughts and other medicines had a horrible taste and
appearance. The prisoners, either for the purpose of exciting pity, or
from having heard of the opium story, which the nature of the medicines
might incline them to believe, told the English that they had
miraculously escaped death, having had poison administered to them by
their medical officers.” So much for the invalids under the care of the
Surgeon-in-chief.

Now for the others.—“The army unfortunately had, as Apothecary-in-chief,
a wretch who had been allowed the use of five camels to convey from
Cairo the quantity of medicines necessary for the expedition. This man
was base enough to supply himself on his own account, instead of
medicines, with sugar, coffee, wine, and other provisions, which he
afterwards sold at an enormous profit. On the discovery of the fraud,
the indignation of the General-in-chief was without bounds, and the
offender was condemned to be shot; but all the medical officers, who
were so distinguished for their courage, and whose attentive care had
rendered them so dear to the army, implored his pardon, alleging that
the honour of the whole body would be compromised by his punishment; and
thus the culprit escaped. Some time after, when the English took
possession of Cairo, this man joined them, and made common cause with
them; but, having attempted to renew some of his old offences, he was
condemned to be hanged, and again escaped by slandering the
General-in-chief Buonaparte, of whom he invented a multitude of horrible
stories, and, by representing himself as the identical person who had,
by the General’s orders, administered opium to the soldiers infected
with the plague. His pardon was the condition and the reward of his
calumnies. This was doubtless the first source whence the story was
derived, by those who were not induced to propagate it from malevolent
motives.

“Time has, however, fully exposed this absurd calumny, as well as many
others which have been applied in the same direction, and that with so
great a rapidity, that on revising my manuscript, I have been surprised
at the importance I have attached to the refutation of a charge which no
one would now dare to maintain. Still, I thought it best to preserve
what I had written, as a testimony of the impression of the moment; and
if I have now added some farther details, it is because they happened to
lie within my reach, and I thought it important to record them as
historical facts.”

Sir Robert Wilson has, in his work, boasted, with seeming complacency,
of having been the first to make known and to propagate these odious
charges in Europe. His countryman, Sir Sydney Smith, may perhaps dispute
this honour with him, particularly as he may, in a great measure at
least, justly lay claim to the merit of their invention. To him, and to
the system of corruption he encouraged, Europe is indebted for all the
false reports with which she has been inundated, to the great detriment
of our brave army of Egypt.

It is well known that Sir Sydney Smith did every thing in his power to
corrupt our army. The false intelligence from Europe—the slander of the
General-in-chief—the powerful bribes held out to the officers and
soldiers,—were all approved by him: the documents are published, his
proclamations are known. At one time they created sufficient alarm in
the French General to induce him to seek to put a stop to them; which he
did by forbidding all communication with the English, and stating in the
Order of the day that their Commodore had gone mad. This assertion was
believed in the French army; and it enraged Sir Sydney Smith so much
that he sent Napoleon a challenge. The General replied that he had
business of too great importance on his hands to think of troubling
himself about such a trifle: had he received a challenge from the great
Marlborough, then indeed he might have thought it worth while to
consider of it: but if the English seaman really felt inclined to amuse
himself at a tilting-match, he would send him one of the bullies in his
army, and neutralize a few yards of the sea-coast, where the mad
Commodore might come ashore, and enjoy his heart’s content of it.

As I am on the subject of Egypt, I will here note down all the
information I collected in my detached conversations, and which may
possibly not be found in the Campaign of Egypt, dictated by Napoleon to
the Grand Marshal.

The campaign of Italy exhibits all the most brilliant and decisive
results to which military genius and conception ever gave birth.
Diplomatic views, administrative talents, legislative measures, are
there uniformly blended in harmony with the prodigies of war. But the
most striking and the finishing touch in the picture is the sudden and
irresistible ascendancy which the young General acquired:—the anarchy of
equality—the jealousy of republican principles—every thing vanished
before him: there was not a power, even to the ridiculous sovereignty of
the Directory, which was not immediately suspended. The Directory
required no accounts from the General-in-chief of the army of Italy; it
was left to himself to send them: no plan, no system was prescribed to
him; but accounts of victories and conclusions of armistices, of the
destruction of old states, and the creation of new ones, were constantly
received from him.

In the expedition of Egypt may be retraced all that is admired in the
campaign of Italy. The reflecting observer will even perceive that, in
the Egyptian expedition, the points of resemblance are of a more
important nature, from the difficulties of every kind which gave
character to the campaign, and required greater genius and resources on
the part of its conductor. In Egypt, a new order of things appeared:
climate, country, inhabitants, religion, manners, and mode of fighting,
all were different.[20]

Footnote 20:

  The most valuable information respecting these two immortal campaigns
  will doubtless be furnished by the collection of the orders of the
  day, and the daily correspondence of the General-in-chief with the
  Generals and Commissaries of his army. Several volumes of them have
  been published by Pankouke, under the title of “Correspondance
  inédite, officielle et confidentielle de Napoléon Bonaparte, &c.” They
  will altogether furnish the most excellent and useful lessons to the
  students of the military art.

The Memoirs of the Campaign of Egypt will determine points which, at the
time, formed only the subjects of conjecture and discussion to a large
portion of society.

1st. The expedition of Egypt was undertaken at the earnest and mutual
desire of the Directory and the General-in-chief.

2nd. The taking of Malta was not the consequence of a private
understanding, but of the wisdom of the General-in-chief. “It was in
Mantua that I took Malta,” said the Emperor one day; “it was the
generous treatment observed towards Wurmser that secured to me the
submission of the Grand Master and his Knights.”

3rd. The conquest of Egypt was planned with as much judgment as it was
executed with skill. If Saint Jean d’Acre had surrendered to the French
army, a great revolution would have taken place in the East; the
General-in-chief would have established an empire there, and the
destinies of France would have taken a different turn.

4th. On its return from the campaign of Syria, the French army had
scarcely sustained any loss; it remained in the most formidable and
prosperous condition.

5th. The departure of the General-in-chief for France was the result of
a grand and magnanimous plan. How ridiculous is the imbecility of those
who consider that departure as an escape or a desertion!

6th. Kleber fell a victim to Mussulman fanaticism. There is not the
slightest foundation for the absurd calumny which would have attributed
this catastrophe to the policy of his predecessor, or to the intrigues
of his successor.

7th, and lastly. It is pretty well proved that Egypt would have remained
for ever a French province if any other but Menou had been appointed for
her defence; nothing but the gross errors of that general could have
lost us the possession of Egypt.

The Emperor said, that no army in the world was less fit for the
Egyptian expedition than that which he led there—the army of Italy. It
would be difficult to describe the disgust, the discontent, the
melancholy, the despair of that army, on its first arrival in Egypt. The
Emperor himself saw two dragoons run out of the ranks and throw
themselves into the Nile. Bertrand had seen the most distinguished
generals, such as Lannes and Murat, in momentary fits of rage, throw
their laced hats on the sand and trample on them in the presence of the
soldiers. The Emperor explained these feelings surprisingly well. “This
army,” said he, “had fulfilled its career. All the individuals belonging
to it were satiated with wealth, rank, pleasure, and consideration; they
were not fit for the Deserts and the fatigues of Egypt: and,” continued
he, “had that army been placed in other hands than mine, it is difficult
to say what excesses might not have been committed.”

More than one conspiracy was formed to carry away the flags to
Alexandria, and other things of the same sort. The influence, the
character, and the glory of the General, could alone restrain the
troops. One day, Napoleon, losing his temper in his turn, rushed among a
group of discontented generals, and addressing himself, to the tallest,
“You have held mutinous language,” said he, with vehemence, “take care
that I do not fulfil my duty; it is not your being six foot high that
should save you from being shot in a couple of hours.”

With regard, however, to their conduct before the enemy, the Emperor
said that this army never ceased to be the army of Italy; that it still
preserved the same admirable character. The most difficult party to
manage was that which the Emperor used to call “the faction of the
_sentimentalists_,” whom it was impossible to keep under any restraint;
their minds were diseased; they spent the night in gazing on the moon
for the reflected image of the idols they had left in Europe. At the
head of this party was Berthier, the weak and spiritless Berthier, who,
when the General-in-chief was preparing to sail from Toulon, posted
night and day from Paris to tell him that he was unwell, and could not
accompany him, though he was the head of the staff. The General-in-chief
took not the smallest notice of what he said, and Berthier, finding
himself no longer at the feet of the fair one who had despatched him
with the excuse, set sail along with him! On his arrival in Egypt, he
became a prey to _ennui_, and was unable to subdue his tender
recollections;—he solicited and obtained permission to return to France.
He took leave of Napoleon, and bade him a formal adieu; but shortly
returned with his eyes full of tears, saying that, after all, he would
not dishonour himself, and that he could not separate his destiny from
that of his General.

Berthier’s love was mingled with a kind of worship. Adjoining the tent,
destined for his own use, he always had another prepared, and furnished
with the magnificence of the most elegant boudoir; this was consecrated
to the portrait of his mistress, before which he would sometimes even go
so far as to burn incense. This tent was pitched even in the deserts of
Syria. Napoleon said, with a smile, that his temple had oftener than
once been profaned by a worship less pure, through the clandestine
introduction of foreign divinities.

Berthier never relinquished his passion, which sometimes carried him to
the very verge of idiotcy. In his first account of the battle of
Marengo, young Visconti, his aide-de-camp, who was but a captain at
most, was mentioned five or six times in remembrance of his mother. “One
would have thought,” said Napoleon, “that the youth had gained the
battle.” Surely the General-in-chief must have been ready to throw the
paper in the writer’s face!

The Emperor calculated that he had given Berthier forty millions during
his life; but he supposed that from this weakness of his mind, his want
of regularity, and his ridiculous passion, he had squandered away a
great part of it.

The discontent of the troops in Egypt happily vented itself in sarcastic
jokes: this is the humour which always bears a Frenchman through
difficulties. They bore a great resentment against General Caffarelli,
whom they believed to have been one of the promoters of the expedition.
Caffarelli had a wooden leg, having lost one of his limbs on the banks
of the Rhine; and whenever the soldiers saw him hobbling-past, they
would say, loud enough for him to hear,—“That fellow does not care what
happens; he is certain, at all events, to have one foot in France.”

The men of science who accompanied the expedition also came in for their
share of the jests. Asses were very numerous in Egypt; almost all the
soldiers possessed one or two, and they used always to call them their
_demi-savans_.

The General-in-chief, on his departure from France, had issued a
proclamation, in which he informed the troops that he was about to take
them to a country where he would make them all rich; where they should
each have seven acres of land at their disposal. The soldiers, when they
found themselves in the midst of the Desert, surrounded by the boundless
ocean of sand, began to question the generosity of their General: they
thought he had observed singular moderation in having promised only
seven acres. “The rogue,” said they, “might with safety give us as much
as he pleases; we should not abuse his good nature.”

While the army was passing through Syria, there was not a soldier but
was heard to repeat these lines from Zaire:—

            Les Français sont lassés de chercher désormais
          Des climats que pour eux le destin n’a point faits,
          Ils n’abandonnent point leur fertile patrie,
          Pour languir aux déserts de l’aride Arabie.

On one occasion, the General-in-chief, having a few moments’ leisure to
look about the country, took advantage of the ebb-tide, and crossed on
foot to the opposite coast of the Red Sea. Night surprised him on his
return, and he lost his way in the midst of the rising tide. He was in
the greatest danger, and very narrowly escaped perishing precisely in
the same manner as Pharaoh. “This,” said Napoleon, “would have furnished
all the preachers of Christianity with a splendid text against me.” On
reaching the Arabian coast of the Red Sea, he received a deputation of
the Cenobites of Mount Sinai, who came to implore his protection, and to
request him to inscribe his name on the ancient register of their
charters. Napoleon inscribed his name in the same list with those of
Ali, Saladin, Ibrahim, and others! In allusion to this circumstance, or
something of a similar kind, the Emperor observed that he had in the
course of one year received letters from Rome and Mecca; the Pope
addressing him as his dearest son, and the Sherif styling him the
Protector of the holy Kaaba.

This singular coincidence, however, is scarcely surprising, with
reference to him who has led armies both through the burning sands of
the Tropic, and over the frozen _Steppes_ of the North; who, when he
narrowly escaped being swallowed up in the waves of the Red Sea, or
might have perished in the flames of Moscow, was threatening the Indies
from those two extreme points.

The General-in-chief shared the fatigues of the soldiers. The privations
endured by every individual in the army were sometimes so great that
they were compelled to dispute with each other for the smallest
enjoyments, without the least distinction of rank. To such extremities
were they reduced that, in the Desert, the soldiers would hardly
relinquish their places to allow the General to dip his hands in a muddy
stream. On one occasion, as they were passing by the ruins of Pelusium,
and were almost suffocated with the heat, some one resigned to him a
fragment of a door, beneath which he contrived to shade his head for a
few minutes: “And this,” said Napoleon, “was no trifling concession.” It
was on this very spot, while removing some stones at his feet, that
chance rendered him the possessor of a superb antique, well known in the
learned world.[21]

Footnote 21:

  A cameo of Augustus, a mere sketch, but admirably designed. Napoleon
  gave it to General Andreossi, who was a great collector of
  antiquities; but M. Denon, who was at that time absent, having
  afterwards seen this cameo, was struck with its resemblance to
  Napoleon, who then had the stone returned to him and kept it. It
  afterwards fell into the possession of Josephine, and M. Denon does
  not know what has since become of it. (_This information was furnished
  to me by M. Denon since my return to France._)

In proceeding to Asia, the French army had to cross the Desert which
separates that continent from Africa. Kleber, who commanded the advanced
guard, mistook his road, and lost his way in the Desert. Napoleon, who
was following at the distance of half a day’s march, attended by a
slender escort, found himself at night-fall in the midst of the Turkish
camp: he was closely pursued, and escaped only because, it being night,
the Turks suspected that an ambush was intended. The next source of
uneasiness was the doubtful fate of Kleber and his detachment, and the
greater part of the night was passed in the most cruel anxiety. At
length they obtained information respecting them from some Arabs of the
Desert, and the General-in-chief hastened, on his dromedary, in quest of
his troops. He found them overwhelmed with despair, and ready to perish
from thirst and fatigue; some of the young soldiers had, in a moment of
frenzy, even broken their muskets. The sight of their General seemed to
give them new life, by reviving their hopes. Napoleon informed them that
a supply of provisions and water was coming up behind him. “But,” said
he, to the troops, “if relief had been longer delayed, would that have
excused your murmuring and loss of courage? No, soldiers; learn to die
with honour.”

Napoleon travelled the greater part of the way through the Desert on a
dromedary. The physical hardihood of this animal renders it unnecessary
to pay the least attention to his sustenance; he scarcely eats or
drinks; but his moral sensibility is extreme, harsh treatment provokes
his resentment, and renders him furious. The Emperor observed that the
roughness of his trot created nausea, like the motion of a ship. The
animal will travel twenty leagues a day. The Emperor formed some
dromedary regiments, and the use he made of them in the army soon proved
the destruction of the Arabs. The rider squats himself on the back of
the animal, through whose nostrils a ring is passed, which serves to
guide him: he is very obedient, and on a certain signal, made by the
voice of the rider, the animal kneels down to allow him to alight. The
dromedary will carry very heavy burdens, and he is never unloaded during
the whole of the journey. On his arrival at evening stations, his load
is propped up, and the animal lies down and goes to sleep: at day-break
he rises,—his burden is on his back, and he is ready to continue his
journey. The dromedary is only a beast of burden, and not at all fit for
draught. In Syria, however, they succeeded in yoking them to
field-pieces, thus rendering them essentially serviceable.

Napoleon became very popular among the Egyptians, who gave him the name
of Sultan Kebir (Father of Fire). He inspired particular respect:
wherever he appeared the people rose in his presence; and this deference
was paid to him alone. The uniform consideration with which he treated
the Sheiks, and the adroitness by which he gained their confidence,
rendered him truly the sovereign of Egypt, and more than once saved his
life. But for their disclosures, he would have fallen a victim to
fanaticism, like Kleber, who, on the contrary, rendered himself odious
to the Sheiks, and perished in consequence of subjecting one of them to
the punishment of the bastinado. Bertrand was one of the judges who
condemned the assassin, and, on his telling us this fact one day at
dinner, the Emperor observed:—“If the slanderers, who accuse me of
having caused the death of Kleber, were acquainted with the fact you
have mentioned, they would not hesitate to call you the assassin, or the
accomplice, and would take it for granted that your title of Grand
Marshal, and your residence at Saint Helena, are the reward and the
punishment of the crime.”

Napoleon willingly conversed with the people of the country, and always
displayed sentiments of justice which struck them with wonder. On his
way back to Syria, an Arab tribe came to meet him, for the double
purpose of shewing him respect and of selling their services as guides.
“The chief of the tribe was unwell, and his place was filled by his son,
a youth of the age and size of your boy here,” said the Emperor to me:
“he was mounted on his dromedary, riding close beside me, and chatting
to me with great familiarity. ’Sultan Kebir, said he, ‘I could give you
good advice, now that you are returning to Cairo,’ ‘Well, speak, my
friend, and if your advice is good, I will follow it.’—‘I’ll tell you
what I would do, if I were in your place. As soon as I got to Cairo, I
would order the richest slave-merchant into the market, and I would
choose twenty of the prettiest women for myself; I would next send for
the richest jewellers, and would make them give me up a good share of
their stock; I would then do the same with all the other merchants; for
what is the use of reigning, or being powerful, if not to acquire
riches?’—‘But, my friend, suppose it were more noble to preserve them
for others?’ This sentiment seemed to make him reflect a little, without
convincing him. The young man was evidently very promising, for an Arab:
he was lively and courageous, and led his troop with dignity and order.
He is, perhaps, destined, one day or other, to carry his advice into
execution for his own benefit in the market-place of Cairo.”

On another occasion, some Arabs who were on friendly terms with the
army, penetrated into a village on the frontier, and an unfortunate
Fellah (peasant) was killed. The Sultan Kebir flew into a great passion;
and, vowing that he would have vengeance, gave orders that the tribe
should be pursued into the Desert to extinction. This order was given in
the presence of the principal Sheiks, one of whom could not refrain from
laughing at his anger and his determination. “Sultan Kebir,” said he,
“you are playing a bad game just now: do not quarrel with these people;
they can do you ten times more harm than you can do them. And besides,
what is it all about. Because they have killed a miserable peasant? Was
he your cousin (a proverbial expression among them)?” “He was more than
my cousin,” replied Napoleon; “all those whom I govern are my children:
power is given to me only that I may ensure their safety.” On hearing
these words all the Sheiks bowed their heads, and said, “O! that is very
fine;—you have spoken like the Prophet.”

The decision of the Grand Mosque of Cairo in favour of the French army
was a masterpiece of skill on the part of the General-in-chief, who
induced the synod of the chief Sheiks to declare, by a public act, that
the Mussulmans should obey, and pay tribute to, the French general. It
is the first and only example of the sort, since the establishment of
the Koran, which forbids submission to Infidels. The details of this
transaction are invaluable: they will be found in the Campaigns of
Egypt.

Saint-Jean d’Acre, doubtless, presented a singular spectacle, when two
European armies met with hostile intentions in a little town of Asia,
with the mutual purpose of securing the possession of a portion of
Africa; but it is still more extraordinary that the persons who directed
the efforts of each party were both of the same nation, of the same age,
of the same rank, of the same corps, and of the same school.

Philippeaux, to whose talents the English and Turks owed the
preservation of Saint Jean d’Acre, had been the companion of Napoleon at
the military school of Paris: they had been there examined together,
previous to their being sent to their respective corps. “His figure
resembled yours,” said the Emperor to me, after having dictated his
eulogium in the Memoirs, and mentioned all the mischief he had done him.
“Sire,” I answered, “there were many other points of affinity between
us; we had been intimate and inseparable companions at the Military
School. When he passed through London with Sir Sydney Smith, who, by his
assistance, had been enabled to escape from the Temple, he sought for me
in every direction. I called at his lodgings only half an hour after his
departure; had it not been for this accident, I should probably have
accompanied him. I was at the time without occupation; the prospect of
adventure might have tempted me; and how strangely might the course of
my destinies have been turned in a new direction!”

“I am well aware,” said Napoleon, “of the influence which chance usurps
over our political determinations; and it is the knowledge of that
circumstance which has always kept me free from prejudice, and rendered
me very indulgent with regard to the party adopted by individuals in our
political convulsions. To be a good Frenchman, or to wish to become one,
was all that I looked for in any one.”—The Emperor then went on to
compare the confusion of our troubles to battles in the night-time,
where each man attacks his neighbour, and friends are often confounded
with foes; but when daylight returns, and order is restored, every one
forgives the injury which he has sustained through mistake. “Even for
myself,” said he, “how could I undertake to say that there might not
have existed circumstances sufficiently powerful, notwithstanding my
natural sentiments, to induce me to emigrate? The vicinity of the
frontier, for instance, a friendly attachment, or the influence of a
chief. In revolutions, we can only speak with certainty to what we have
done: it is silly to affirm that we could not have acted otherwise.” The
Emperor then related a singular example of the influence of chance over
the destinies of men. Serrurier and the younger Hedouville, while
travelling together on foot to emigrate into Spain, were met by a
military patrol. Hedouville, being the younger and more active of the
two, cleared the frontier, thought himself very lucky, and went to spend
a life of mere vegetation in Spain. Serrurier, on the contrary, being
obliged to return into the interior, bewailed his unhappy fate, and
became a marshal: such is the uncertainty of human foresight and
calculations!

At Saint-Jean d’Acre, the General-in-chief lost Caffarelli, of whom he
was extremely fond. Caffarelli entertained a sort of reverential respect
for the General-in-chief. The influence of this sentiment was so great
that, though he was delirious for several days previous to his death,
when Napoleon went to see him, the announcement of his name seemed to
recal him to life: he became more collected, his spirits revived, and he
conversed coherently; but he relapsed into his former state immediately
after Napoleon’s departure. This singular phenomenon was renewed every
time the General-in-chief paid him a visit.

Napoleon received, during the siege of Saint-Jean d’Acre, an affecting
proof of heroic devotedness. While he was in the trenches, a shell fell
at his feet; two grenadiers who observed it immediately rushed towards
him, placed him between them, and raising their arms above his head,
completely covered every part of his body. Happily the shell respected
the whole group; nobody was injured.

One of these brave grenadiers afterwards became General Dumesnil, who
lost a leg in the campaign of Moscow, and commanded the fortress of
Vincennes at the time of the invasion in 1814. The capital had been for
some weeks occupied by the Allies, and Dumesnil still held out. Nothing
was then talked of in Paris but his obstinate defence, and his humorous
reply when summoned by the Russians to surrender;—“Give me back my leg,
and I will give up my fortress.”

The French soldiers acquired extraordinary reputation in Egypt, and not
without cause; they had dispersed and dismayed the celebrated Mamelucks,
the most formidable militia of the East. After the retreat from Syria, a
Turkish army landed at Aboukir: Murat-Bey, the most powerful and brave
of the Mamelucks, left Upper Egypt, whither he had fled for safety, and
reached the Turkish camp by a circuitous route. On the landing of the
Turks, the French detachments had fallen back in order to concentrate
their forces. The Pacha who commanded the Turks was delighted at this
movement, which he mistook for the effect of fear; and, on perceiving
Murat-Bey, he exultingly exclaimed:—“So! these are the terrible French
whom you could not face; see, the moment I make my appearance, how they
fly before me.“ The indignant Murat-Bey furiously replied:—“Pacha,
render thanks to the Prophet that it has pleased these Frenchmen to
retire; if they should return, you will disappear before them like dust
before the wind.”

His words were prophetical:—some days after, the French poured down upon
the Turkish army and put it to flight. Murat-Bey, who had interviews
with several of our generals, was extremely surprised at their
diminutive stature and pitiful condition. The Oriental nations attach
high importance to the bodily stature, and they were unable to conceive
how so much genius could exist within such small dimensions. The
appearance of Kleber alone came up to their ideas; he was an uncommonly
fine-looking man, but his manners were rude. The discrimination of the
Egyptians induced them to think that he was not a Frenchman; in fact,
though a native of Alsace, he had spent the early part of his life in
the Prussian army, and might very well have passed for a German. Some
one said that Kleber had been a Janissary in his youth; the Emperor
burst into a fit of laughter, and said somebody had been imposing on
him.

The Grand-Marshal told the Emperor that at the battle of Aboukir he was
for the first time placed in his army, and near his person. He was then
so little accustomed to the boldness of his manœuvres, that he
scarcely understood any of the orders he heard him give. “Particularly,
Sire,” added he, “when I heard you call out to an officer, ‘Hercule, my
dear fellow, take twenty-five men and charge that rabble:’ I really
thought I had lost my senses; your Majesty pointed to a detachment of a
thousand Turkish horse.”

After all, the losses sustained by the army in Egypt were far from being
so considerable as might have been expected in a country to which the
troops were unaccustomed; particularly when the insalubrity of the
climate, the remoteness of the resources of the country, the ravages of
the plague, and the numerous actions which have immortalized that army,
are taken into account. The French force, at its landing in Egypt,
amounted to 30,000 men; it was augmented by the wrecks of the battle of
Aboukir, and probably also by some partial arrivals from France; and yet
the total loss sustained by the army, from the commencement of the
campaign to two months after the departure of the General-in-chief for
Europe, (during the space of seven or eight-and-twenty months,) amounted
only to 8,915, as is proved by the official report of the
Muster-master-general.[22]

Footnote 22:

            Killed in battle                           3614
            Died of their wounds                        854
            Died through various accidents              290
            Died from common disorders                 2468
            Died from the pestilential fever           1689
                                                         ——
                                               Total   8915
                                Signed,
             _Cairo, 10 Frimaire, year IX._     Sartelon,
                        Muster-master-general.

The life of a man must indeed be replete with prodigies, when one of his
acts, which is without parallel in history scarcely arrests our
attention. When Cæsar passed the Rubicon, he possessed an army, and was
advancing in his own defence. When Alexander, urged by the ardour of
youth and the fire of genius, landed in Asia, to make war on the great
King, he, Alexander, was the son of a king, a king himself, and courted
the chances of ambition and glory at the head of the forces of his
kingdom. But that a private individual, whose name three years before
was unknown to the world, who at that moment had nothing to aid him but
the reputation of a few victories, his name, and the consciousness of
his genius, should have dared to conceive the project of taking into his
own hands the destinies of thirty millions of men, of protecting them
from external defeats and internal dissensions;—that, roused by the
recital of the troubles which were described to him, and by the idea of
the disasters which he foresaw, he should have exclaimed, “France will
be lost through these fine talkers, these babblers: now is the time to
save her!”—that he should have abandoned his army, and crossed the seas,
at the risk of his liberty and reputation, have reached the French soil
and flown to the capital; that he should there have seized the helm, and
stopped short a nation intoxicated with every excess; that he should
have suddenly brought her back to the true course of reason and
justice;—that he should from that moment have prepared for her a career
of power and glory till then unknown;—and that all this should have been
accomplished without the shedding of a single tear or a drop of
blood;—such an undertaking may be regarded as one of the most gigantic
and sublime that ever was heard of; it will fill calm and dispassionate
posterity with astonishment and admiration; though at the time it was
branded by some with the name of a desperate flight, and an infamous
desertion. The army, however, which Napoleon left behind him, continued
to occupy Egypt for the space of two years longer. It was the opinion of
the Emperor that it ought never to have been forced to surrender; and
the Grand Marshal, who accompanied the army to the last moment,
concurred in that opinion.

After the departure of the General-in-chief, Kleber, who succeeded him,
deceived and misled by intrigues, treated for the evacuation of Egypt;
but when the enemy’s refusal compelled him to seek for new glory, and to
form a more just estimate of his own force, he totally altered his
opinions, and declared himself favourable to the occupation of Egypt;
and this had even become the general sentiment of the army. He now
thought only of maintaining himself in the country; he dismissed those
who had influenced him in forming his first design, and collected around
him only those who favoured the contrary measure. Had he lived, Egypt
would have been secure; to his death her loss must be attributed. The
command of the army was afterwards divided between Menou and Regnier. It
then became a mere field of intrigue: the energy and courage of the
French troops continued unabated; but they were no longer employed and
directed as they had been by Kleber. Menou was totally inefficient; the
English advanced to attack him with twenty thousand men; his force was
much more considerable, and the general spirit of the two armies was not
to be compared. By an inconceivable infatuation, Menou hastily dispersed
his troops, as soon as he learned that the English were about to appear,
the latter advanced in a mass, and were attacked only in detail. “How
blind is fortune,” said the Emperor; “by the adoption of contrary
measures, the English would infallibly have been destroyed; and how many
new chances might not that event have brought about!”

Their landing was admirable, said the Grand Marshal: in less than five
or six minutes five thousand five hundred men appeared in order of
battle: it was a truly theatrical movement; and it was thrice repeated.
Their landing was opposed by only twelve hundred men, who did them
considerable damage. Shortly after, this mass, amounting to between
thirteen and fourteen thousand, was intrepidly attacked by General
Lanusse. The General had only three thousand troops; but fired with
ambition, and not doubting that his force was adequate to fulfil the
object he had in view, he would not wait for reinforcements; at first he
overthrew every thing in his way, and, after causing immense slaughter
to the enemy, he was at length defeated. Had his force been two or three
thousand stronger, he would have attained his object.

The English were greatly astonished when they had an opportunity of
judging for themselves of our real situation in Egypt; and they
considered themselves extremely fortunate in the turn which affairs had
taken.

General Hutchinson, who reaped the glory of the conquest, said, on his
return to Europe, that had the English known the real state of things,
they would certainly never have attempted to land; but in England it was
believed that there were not six thousand French troops in Egypt. This
mistake arose out of the intercepted letters, as well as the
intelligence that was collected in Egypt. “So natural is it to
Frenchmen,” said Napoleon, “to exaggerate, murmur, and misrepresent,
whenever they are dissatisfied. These reports, however, were created
merely by ill-humour or diseased imaginations: it was said that there
was a famine in Egypt; that the French had all been destroyed, at every
new battle; that the plague had swept away the whole army; that there
was not a man left,” &c.

Through the repetition of these reports, Pitt was at length persuaded of
their reality; and how could it be otherwise? The First Consul saw the
despatches from his successor addressed to the Directory; and also
letters from various persons in the French army. Who can explain the
contradictions they contained? Who will henceforth trust to individual
authority for the support of his opinion? Kleber, the General-in-chief,
informed the Directory, that he had only six thousand men, while in the
same packet the accounts of the inspector of reviews exhibited upwards
of twenty thousand. Kleber declared that he was without money, and the
treasury accounts display vast sums. The General-in-chief alleged that
the artillery was merely an intrenched park, destitute of ammunition;
while the estimates of that department made mention of stores for
several campaigns. “Thus, if Kleber, by virtue of the treaty he
commenced, had evacuated Egypt,” said the Emperor, “I should undoubtedly
have brought him to trial on his return to France. All these
contradictory documents had been submitted to the examination and
opinion of the Council of State.”

From the letters of Kleber, the General-in-chief, an idea may be formed
of the tone of those written by persons of inferior rank, and by the
common soldiers. Such, however, were the communications daily
intercepted by the English; which they printed and which guided them in
their operations—a circumstance that must have cost them dear. The
Emperor observed that in all his campaigns he had seen the same effect
produced by intercepted letters, which sometimes had proved of great
advantage to him.

Among the letters which at this period fell into his hands, he found
odious attacks upon himself, which he felt the more sensibly because
several of them were written by persons whom he had loaded with
benefits, in whom he had reposed full confidence, and whom he believed
to be strongly attached to him. One of these individuals, whose fortune
he had made, and in whom he trusted with the utmost sincerity, alleged
that the General-in-chief had decamped, after robbing the treasury of
two millions. Fortunately, in these same despatches the accounts of the
Paymaster proved that the General had not even received the whole amount
of the pay due to him. “On reading this statement,” said the Emperor, “I
felt really disgusted at mankind. This was the first moral
disappointment I had ever experienced; and if it has not been the only
one, it has, perhaps, at least, been the most severe. Many individuals
in the army thought me ruined, and they were already eagerly seeking to
pay their court in the proper quarter at my expense.” The author of the
assertion above alluded to subsequently endeavoured to restore himself
to favour. The Emperor signified that he should have no objection to his
being employed in a subordinate situation; but that he would never see
him again. To every application he constantly replied that he did not
know him: this was the only vengeance he took.

The Emperor never ceased to repeat that Egypt ought to have remained in
the possession of the French, which would infallibly have been the case
had the country been defended by Kleber or Desaix. “These were my two
most distinguished lieutenants,” said he; “both possessed great and rare
merits, though their characters and dispositions were very different.”

Kleber’s was the talent of nature; Desaix’s was entirely the result of
education and assiduity. The genius of Kleber only burst forth at
particular moments, when roused by the importance of the occasion; and
then it immediately slumbered again in the bosom of indolence and
pleasure. The talent of Desaix was always in full activity; he lived
only for noble ambition and true glory: his character was formed on the
true ancient model. The Emperor said that his death was the greatest
loss he could possibly have sustained. Their conformity of education and
principles would always have preserved a good understanding between
them. Desaix would have been satisfied with secondary rank, and would
have remained ever devoted and faithful. Had he not been killed at the
battle of Marengo, the First Consul would have given him the command of
the army of Germany, instead of continuing it to Moreau. A very
extraordinary circumstance in the destiny of these two lieutenants of
Napoleon was that on the very day and at the very hour when Kleber was
assassinated at Cairo, Desaix was killed by a cannon-ball at Marengo.

                   THE EMPEROR’S METHOD OF DICTATING.

October 1st—3rd. The wind, the sea, and the temperature still continued
without variation. The westerly wind, which had at first been so much in
our favour, now began to be adverse. We had taken an easterly direction,
in the hope of falling in with the trade-winds; but we now found
ourselves to the leeward of the place of our destination, through the
continuance of the westerly winds—a circumstance which surprised every
body, and excited dissatisfaction among the crew.

The Emperor every morning regularly continued his dictation, in which he
daily took a deeper interest; consequently his hours henceforth seemed
less tedious.

The vessel had been sent out of port in such a hurry that many repairs
remained to be completed after we had put to sea, and the painting of
the ship had only recently been finished. The Emperor’s sense of
smelling is extremely delicate; and he found the paint so very offensive
that he was forced to confine himself to his cabin for two days.

Every evening, when taking his walk on deck, he loved to revert to the
occupation of the morning. At first, he was assisted by no other
document than a wretched work entitled _Guerres des Français en Italie_,
written without end or object, and devoid of any connected chronological
plan. The Emperor glanced through it, and his memory supplied all
deficiences: this faculty indeed appeared to me the more extraordinary
since it always seemed to be in readiness when needed, and as if at
command.

When the Emperor commenced his daily dictations, he always complained
that the circumstances to which he wished to recur were no longer
familiar to him. He seemed to want confidence in himself, saying he
should never get through the task. After considering for a few moments
he would rise and walk about, and then begin to dictate. From that
moment he was quite another man: every thing flowed smoothly; he spoke
as if by inspiration; places, dates, phrases—he stopped at nothing.

On the following day I read to him what he had dictated. After making
the first correction he continued to go on with the same subject, as
though he had said nothing about it the day before. The difference
between the first and the second version was very great: the latter was
more positive and diffuse, and better arranged; indeed it sometimes
materially differed from the first.

On the day succeeding the first correction, the same operation was
repeated, and the Emperor commenced his third dictation for the purpose
of setting the two former ones right. But after that, had he dictated a
fourth, a seventh, or a tenth time, as he in some instances did, it
would have been a repetition of precisely the same ideas, the same
construction of phrases, and almost the same words. It was needless to
take the trouble to write, though before his eyes: he paid no attention
to what was doing, and continued to the end of his subject. It would
have been vain to ask him to repeat any thing that might not have been
distinctly heard: he still went on; and as he dictated with great
rapidity, I never ventured to interrupt him, lest I should lose still
more, and find myself unable to recover the thread of the subject.

                          A SINGULAR ACCIDENT.

4th—7th. The continuance of the south-west wind was truly unfortunate.
We were now going back instead of forward and we had completely entered
the Gulf of Guinea. There we perceived a ship, with which we spoke. She
proved to be a French ship, driven out of her course like ourselves. She
had sailed from a port in Britany, and was bound for the Isle of
Bourbon. The Emperor had been much distressed for want of books; and I
jokingly said that perhaps I might have a box-full on board that ship,
as I had despatched one to the Isle of Bourbon, a few months since. I
spoke truly. Such is the caprice of chance! Had I been in quest of this
ship, I might have traversed the ocean in vain. This was the identical
vessel: I learned her name next day from the officer who had visited
her. This officer strangely surprised the French captain, by telling him
that the Emperor Napoleon was on board the ship which he then saw making
for St. Helena. The poor fellow shook his head sorrowfully, and said,
“You have robbed us of our treasure: you have taken away him who knew
how to govern us according to our tastes and manners.”

        COMPLAINTS OF THE CREW AGAINST THE ADMIRAL.—EXAMINATION
               OF ANOTHER WORK.—REFUTATIONS.—REFLECTIONS.

8th—11th. The weather continued obstinately settled. We every evening
consoled ourselves, for the unfavourable state of the day, with the hope
of a change during the night; but we arose in the morning with the same
disappointment. We had been almost within sight of the Congo, and we
stood off. Every one manifested discontent and _ennui_. The crew
complained of the Admiral; had he taken the usual course, said they, we
should have reached our destination long before; his caprice, they
observed, had led him, in spite of reason, to try an experiment, of
which they knew not what might be the consequence. Their murmurs were
not, however, so vehement as those raised against Christopher Columbus;
we should not have been ill pleased had he been reduced to the necessity
of finding another Saint Salvador, in order to evade the crisis. Being
for my own part fully occupied, this circumstance engrossed but little
of my attention; and after all, one prison was as good as another. As to
the Emperor, he was still more unconcerned at this delay; he merely
looked upon it as so many days spent.

_Les Mémoires de Napoléon Bonaparte, par quelqu’un qui ne l’a jamais
quitté pendant 15 ans_, (_The Memoirs of Napoleon Bonaparte, by one who
was constantly near him, during fifteen years_,) was the title of a work
which I began to examine after the writings of Sir Robert Wilson. It is
a volume of three hundred pages, by an anonymous author—a circumstance
in itself sufficient to inspire distrust at the first outset. But the
composition and style of the work soon created more positive doubts in
the mind of the reflecting reader, who is accustomed to judge of books.
Finally, he who has seen and known but little of the Emperor will not
hesitate to affirm, on reading the very first pages, that this work is a
mere romance, written at pleasure; that the author has never approached
the Emperor; and that he is a hundred leagues distant from his language,
habits, and every thing concerning him. The Emperor never said to a
minister: “Count, do this,”—“Count, execute that.” Ambassadors never
attended his levee. Napoleon could not, at fourteen years of age, have
made to a lady in company, the reply attributed to him, relative to the
Viscomte de Turenne; because from the age of ten to eighteen he was
attending the Military School, where he could not possibly have been
introduced to the company of ladies. It was not Perignon, who did not
know him, but Dugommier, who had been his General, who recommended him
in so marked a way to the Directory. It was a letter for restoring the
Democracy, and not the Bourbons, which an officer addressed to the First
Consul, &c.

The Emperor, who in Europe was universally acknowledged to have
preserved the most impenetrable secrecy with regard to his plans and
views, never indulged in gestures, and still less in soliloquies, which
would have been likely to betray him: nor did his anger ever throw him
into fits of insanity or epilepsy—an absurd fabrication which was long
circulated in the saloons of Paris, but which was relinquished when it
was found that those accidents never occurred on important occasions.
These Memoirs have unquestionably been an ordered work, the speculation
of some bookseller who has furnished the title. Be this as it may, it
might have been supposed that, in adverting to a career so public as
that of the Emperor and of those who surrounded him, the author might
have evinced more accuracy and knowledge of his subject. He is aware of
his insufficiency on this head, and seeks to defend himself by saying
that he was under the necessity of altering names, and that he did not
wish to render certain portraits too striking; but he also observes this
circumspection with regard to facts, so that they cannot be recognised.
They are for the most part entirely the creations of his own fancy.
Thus, the paper whose loss cost the General-in-chief so much anxiety in
Egypt; the recommendation of the young Englishman, who transported
Bonaparte with joy by opening to him so brilliant a perspective of
fortune at Constantinople; the melodrama of Malmaison, where the heroism
of Madame Bonaparte (who is described as an absolute amazon) so promptly
secures the safety of her husband, may perhaps excite the interest of
the reader; but they are only so many fables; and the story relative to
Malmaison shews that the author knew no more of the character and
disposition of the Empress Josephine than of those of the Emperor. The
writer, however, by extolling certain traits, praising certain actions,
and refuting certain falsehoods, assumes an air of impartiality, which,
joined to his pretended situation near the Emperor during fifteen years,
produces a wonderful effect in the eyes of common readers. Most of the
Englishmen on board the vessel looked upon this work as a kind of
oracle. Their opinion was not changed on finding the Emperor’s character
so different from that attributed to him in this romance. They were
inclined to believe that adversity and constraint had wrought an
alteration in the Emperor, rather than to suppose that these printed
statements were false. To my observations, they constantly replied:—“But
the author was an impartial man, and one who was about the Emperor for
fifteen years:”—“But,” said I, “what is this man’s name? If he had
personally injured you in his book, how could you bring him to justice?
Any body here might have written it!” These arguments were of course
unanswerable; but the English found great difficulty in overcoming their
first impressions: such are the common mass of readers, and such is the
effect inevitably produced by printed falsehoods!

But I shall no longer continue my examination of a work which is not
deserving of farther notice; I therefore dispense with the remainder. On
revising my manuscript in Europe, I found that public opinion had made
such progress that I should be ashamed to waste time in refuting
allegations and facts which judgment and common sense have long since
rejected, and which are now repeated only by fools.

In endeavouring to subvert the erroneous notions which this author
thought proper to create respecting the character of Napoleon, it will
perhaps be thought that I should substitute my own opinions in their
stead; but this I shall carefully avoid. I shall content myself with
noting down all that I saw and heard; I will report his conversations,
and nothing more must be expected.

12th—13th. By dint of patience, and with the help of a few trifling
variations, we gradually approached the termination of our voyage; and,
though deprived of the natural monsoon, we had now advanced within a
short distance of our place of destination. As we continued our course,
the weather gradually improved, and at length the wind became perfectly
favourable; but this change did not take place until twenty-four hours
before our arrival.

14th.—The Admiral had previously informed us that he expected to come
within sight of St. Helena this day. We had scarcely risen from table
when our ears were saluted with the cry of _Land!_ This was just within
a quarter of an hour of the moment that had been fixed on. Nothing can
better prove the advancement of navigation, than this sort of miracle,
by which seamen are enabled to foretel the hour at which they shall
arrive at a particular point in the vast expanse. The Emperor went on
the forecastle to see the island: he thought he perceived it, but I
could see nothing. We lay-to all night.

                       ARRIVAL OFF SAINT-HELENA.

15th.—At day light I had a tolerably near view of the island. At first I
thought it rather extensive; but it seemed to diminish considerably as
we approached. At length, about seventy days after our departure from
England, and a hundred and ten after our departure from Paris, we cast
anchor about noon. This was the first link of the chain that was to bind
the modern Prometheus to his rock.

We found at anchor several of the vessels of our squadron, which had
separated from us, or which we had left behind. They had, however,
arrived several days before us: another proof of the extreme uncertainty
attending nautical calculations.

The Emperor, contrary to custom, dressed early and went upon deck; he
went forward on the gangway to view the island. We beheld a kind of
village surrounded by numerous barren and naked hills towering to the
clouds. Every platform, every aperture, the brow of every hill, was
planted with cannon. The Emperor viewed the prospect through his glass.
I stood behind him. My eyes were constantly fixed on his countenance, in
which I could perceive no change; and yet he saw before him, perhaps his
perpetual prison!—perhaps his grave!... What, then, remained for me to
feel or to express!

The Emperor soon left the deck. He desired me to come to him, and we
proceeded with our usual occupation.

The admiral, who had gone ashore very early, returned about six o’clock,
much fatigued. He had been walking about various parts of the island,
and at length thought he had found a habitation that would suit us. The
place, however, stood in need of repairs which might occupy two months.
We had now been confined to our wooden dungeon for nearly three months;
and the precise instructions of the Ministers were that we should be
detained there until our prison on shore was ready for our reception.
The Admiral, to do him justice, was incapable of such barbarity; he
informed us, at the same time betraying a sort of inward satisfaction,
that he would take upon himself the responsibility of putting us ashore
next day.




                          RESIDENCE AT BRIARS.

                     FROM THE 16th OF OCTOBER 1815,
                THE DAY OF OUR LANDING AT SAINT-HELENA,
             TO THE 9th OF DECEMBER, THE DAY PRECEDING THAT
                      OF OUR REMOVAL TO LONGWOOD.

                                -------

An interval of a Month and Twenty-four Days.

                                -------


                LANDING OF THE EMPEROR AT SAINT-HELENA.

Oct. 16th.—After dinner, the Emperor, accompanied by the Grand Marshal,
got into a boat to go ashore. By a remarkable and irresistible impulse,
the officers all assembled on the quarter-deck, and the greater part of
the crew on the gangways. This was not the effect of curiosity, which an
acquaintance of three months’ duration could not fail to have removed,
and which was now succeeded by the liveliest interest. The Emperor,
before he stepped into the boat, sent for the captain of the vessel, and
took leave of him, desiring him at the same time to convey his thanks to
the officers and crew. These words appeared to produce a great sensation
on all by whom they were understood, or to whom they were interpreted.
The remainder of the Emperor’s suite landed about eight o’clock. We were
accompanied by several of the officers, and every one on board seemed to
be sincerely affected at our departure.

We found the Emperor in the apartment which had been assigned to him; a
few minutes after our arrival he went up stairs to his chamber, where we
were called to attend him. His situation here was no better than it had
been on board the vessel; we found ourselves lodged in a sort of inn or
hotel.

The town of St. Helena consists only of one very short street, or row of
houses, built along a very narrow valley, formed between two mountains,
quite perpendicular, composed of barren rock.

           THE EMPEROR FIXES HIS ABODE AT BRIARS—DESCRIPTION
                   OF THE PLACE.—MISERABLE SITUATION.

17th.—At six o’clock in the morning the Emperor, the Grand Marshal, and
the Admiral, rode out on horse-back to visit Longwood, a house which had
been chosen for the Emperor’s residence, and was more than two leagues
from the town. On their return they saw a small villa situated in the
valley about two miles from the town. The Emperor was extremely
reluctant to return to the place where he had passed the preceding
night, and where he felt himself more completely secluded from the world
than he had been when on board the vessel. What with the sentinels who
guarded his doors, and the crowds of persons whom curiosity had
attracted beneath his windows, he had been obliged to confine himself to
his chamber. A small pavilion, attached to the villa above-mentioned,
pleased him, and the Admiral was of opinion that he would be more
agreeably situated there than in the town. In this place, therefore, the
Emperor fixed his residence, and immediately sent for me. He had become
so much interested in his work, on the Campaigns of Italy, that he could
not suspend it:—I immediately proceeded to join him.

The little valley in which the village of St. Helena [James Town] is
situated, extends to a considerable distance up the island, winding
along between two chains of barren hills which enclose it on either
side. A good carriage-road runs through this valley to the distance of
about two miles; after which it is traced along the brow of the hill
which rises on the left, while nothing but precipices and gulfs are
discoverable on the right. The rugged aspect of the country here
gradually diminishes, and the road opens on a small level height, on
which are several houses interspersed with trees and different kinds of
vegetation: this is a little oasis amidst the rocky desert. Here is
situated the modest residence of Mr. Balcombe, a merchant of the island.
At the distance of thirty or forty paces from the dwelling-house, on a
pointed eminence, stood a little summer-house or pavilion, to which, in
fine weather, the family were accustomed to retire to take tea and amuse
themselves: this was the obscure retreat hired by the Admiral, as the
temporary residence of the Emperor; and he took possession of it in the
morning. As I was ascending the winding path leading to the pavilion, I
thought I perceived the Emperor, and stopped to look at him. It was
Napoleon himself: his body was slightly bent, and his hands behind his
back; he wore his usual neat and simple uniform, and his celebrated
little hat. He was standing at the threshold of the door whistling a
popular French tune, when I advanced towards him. “Ah!” said he, “here
you are! Why have you not brought your son?” “Sire,” I replied, “the
respect, the consideration I owe you prevented me.”—“You cannot do
without him,” continued he; “send for him.”

In none of his campaigns, perhaps in no situation of his past life, had
the Emperor been so wretchedly lodged, or subject to so many privations.
The summer-house contained one room, nearly square, on the ground-floor,
having two doors facing each other on two of its sides, and two windows
on each of the other sides. These windows had neither curtains nor
shutters, and there was scarcely a seat in the room. The Emperor was at
this moment alone; his two valets-de-chambre were bustling about to
prepare his bed. He wished to walk a little; but there was no level
ground on any side of the pavilion, which was surrounded by huge pieces
of stone and rock. He took my arm, and began to converse in a cheerful
strain. Night was advancing; profound silence, undisturbed solitude,
prevailed on every side;—what a crowd of sensations and sentiments
overwhelmed me at this moment!—I was in this desert, _tête-a-tête_, and
enjoying familiar conversation with the man who had ruled the
world!—with Napoleon! What were my feelings!——But to understand them it
would be necessary to revert to the days of his past glory; to the time
when one of his decrees sufficed to subvert thrones and create kings! It
would be necessary to reflect on what he was to all who surrounded him
at the Tuileries: the timid embarrassment, the profound respect, with
which he was approached by his ministers and officers; the anxiety, the
dread of ambassadors, princes and even kings! With me all these
sentiments remained in full force.

When the Emperor was about to retire to rest, we found that one of the
windows (which, as I have already observed, had neither shutters nor
curtains) was close upon his bed, nearly on a level with his face. We
barricadoed it as well as we could, so as to exclude the air, of the
effects of which the Emperor is very susceptible, the least draught
being sufficient to give him cold or the tooth-ache. For my part I
ascended to the upper story, immediately above the Emperor’s room. In
this place, the dimensions of which were about seven feet square, there
was only a bed, and not a single chair: this served as a lodging for me
and my son, for whom a mattress was spread out upon the floor. But how
could we complain, being so near the Emperor? we could hear the sound of
his voice, and distinguish his words! The valets-de-chambre slept on the
ground, across the doorway, wrapped up in their cloaks. Such is the
faithful description of the first night which Napoleon passed at Briars.

             DESCRIPTION OF BRIARS.—THE GARDEN.—THE EMPEROR
                  MEETS THE YOUNG LADIES OF THE HOUSE.

18th.—I breakfasted with the Emperor: he had neither table-cloth nor
plates; and the remains of the preceding day’s dinner were brought to
him for breakfast.

The English officer was lodged in the neighbouring house, as our guard,
and two inferior officers marched up and down with an air of military
parade before our eyes, for the purpose of watching our motions.
Breakfast being over, the Emperor proceeded to his dictation, which
occupied him some hours. He afterwards went to explore our new domain,
and to take a view of the surrounding grounds.

Descending our hillock on the side facing the principal house, we found
a path bordered by a hedge and running at the foot of precipices. After
walking along the path to the distance of two hundred paces, we arrived
at a little garden, the door of which was open. This garden is long and
narrow, and formed on very uneven ground; but a tolerable level walk
extends the whole length of it. At the entrance there is a sort of
arbour at one extremity; and at the other are two huts for the negroes
whose business it is to look after the garden. It contains some
fruit-trees and a few flowers. We had no sooner entered the garden, than
we were met by the daughters of the master of the house, girls about
fourteen or fifteen years of age: the one sprightly, giddy, and caring
for nothing; the other more sedate, but, at the same time, possessing
great _naïveté_ of manner; both speak a little French. They had walked
through the garden, and put all the flowers under contribution, to
present them to the Emperor, whom they overwhelmed with the most
whimsical and ridiculous questions. The Emperor was much amused by this
familiarity, to which he was so little accustomed. “We have been to a
masked ball,” said he, when the young ladies had taken their leave.

                THE YOUTH OF FRANCE.—THE EMPEROR VISITS
                         MR. BALCOMBE’S HOUSE.

19th—20th. The Emperor invited my son to breakfast: it may be easily
imagined that he was greatly overjoyed at this honour! It was, perhaps,
the first time he had ever been so near the Emperor, or had spoken to
him; and he was not a little flurried on the occasion.

The table still remained without a cloth; the breakfast continued to be
brought from the town, and consisted of only two or three wretched
dishes. To-day a chicken was brought: the Emperor wished to carve it
himself, and to help us. He was astonished at finding that he succeeded
so well; it was long, he said, since he had done so much: for all his
politeness, he added, had been lost in the business and cares of his
Generalship of Italy.

Coffee is almost a necessary of life to the Emperor: but here it proved
so bad that, on tasting it he thought himself poisoned. He sent it away,
and made me send away mine also.

The Emperor was at this moment using a snuff-box set with several
ancient medals, which were surrounded by Greek inscriptions. The Emperor
not being certain of the name of one of the heads, asked me to translate
the inscription; and on my replying that it was beyond my powers, he
laughed and said, “I see you are no better scholar than myself.” My son
then tremblingly undertook the task, and read Mithridates,
Demetrius-Poliorcetes, and some other names. The extreme youth of my
son, and this circumstance, attracted the Emperor’s attention. “Is your
son so far advanced?” said he; and he began to question him at great
length respecting his Lyceum, his masters, his lessons, &c. Then turning
to me, “What a rising generation I leave behind me!” said he. “This is
all my work! The merits of the French youth will be a sufficient revenge
to me. On beholding the work, all must render justice to the workman!
and the perverted judgment or bad faith of declaimers must fall before
my deeds. If I had thought only of myself, and of securing my own power,
as has been continually asserted, if I had really had any other object
in view than to establish the reign of reason, I should have endeavoured
to _hide the light under a bushel_; instead of which, I devoted myself
to the propagation of knowledge, and yet the youth of France have not
enjoyed all the benefits which I intended they should. My University,
according to the plan I had conceived, was a master-piece in its
combinations, and would have been such in its national results. But an
evil-disposed person spoiled all; and in so doing he was actuated no
doubt by bad intentions, and with a view to some purpose.”

In the evening the Emperor went to visit our neighbours. Mr. Balcombe,
who was suffering under a fit of the gout, lay stretched on a sofa; his
wife and the two young ladies, whom he had met in the morning, were
beside him. The _masked ball_ was resumed again with great spirit. Our
guests liberally dealt out all their store of knowledge. The
conversation turned on novels. One of the young ladies had read Madame
Cottin’s _Mathilde_, and was delighted to find that the Emperor was
acquainted with the work. An Englishman, with a great round face, to all
appearance a true _vacuum plenum_, who had been listening earnestly, in
order to turn his little knowledge of French to the best account,
modestly ventured to ask the Emperor whether the Princess, the friend of
Matilda, whose character he particularly admired, was still living? The
Emperor with a very solemn air replied, “No, sir; she is dead and
buried:” and he was almost tempted to believe he was himself hoaxed,
until he found that the melancholy tidings almost drew tears from the
great staring eyes of the Englishman.

The young ladies evinced no less simplicity, though in them it was more
pardonable: however, I was led to conclude that they had not studied
chronology very deeply. One of them turning over Florian’s _Estelle_, to
shew us that she could read French, happened to light on the name of
Gaston de Foix, and finding him distinguished by the title of General,
she asked the Emperor whether he had been satisfied with his conduct in
the army, whether he had escaped the dangers of war, and whether he was
still living.

21st.—In the morning the Admiral came to visit the Emperor. He knocked
at the door; and had I not been present, the Emperor must have been
reduced to the alternative of opening it himself, or suffering the
Admiral to wait on the outside.

All the scattered members of our little colony, likewise, came from the
town, and we were for a short time collected together. Each described
the wretchedness of his situation, and received the sympathy of the
Emperor.

           HORROR AND MISERY OF OUR SITUATION.—THE EMPEROR’S
              INDIGNATION.—NOTE TO THE ENGLISH GOVERNMENT.

23rd–24th. The English Ministers, in violating the rights of
hospitality, to which we had trusted with such implicit confidence, seem
to have omitted nothing adapted to make us feel this violation the more
bitterly. By banishing us to the farthest extremity of the world, and
reducing us to every kind of privation and ill-treatment, they wish to
make us drain the cup of misery to the very dregs. St. Helena is a true
Siberia: the only difference is its limited extent, and the climate
being warm instead of cold.

The Emperor Napoleon, who but lately possessed such boundless power, and
disposed of so many Crowns, now occupies a wretched hovel, a few feet
square, perched upon a rock, unprovided with furniture, and without
either shutters or curtains to the windows. This place must serve him
for bed-chamber, dressing-room, dining-room, study, and sitting-room;
and he is obliged to go out when it is necessary to have this one
apartment cleaned. His meals, consisting of a few wretched dishes, are
brought to him from a distance, as though he were a criminal in a
dungeon. He is absolutely in want of the necessaries of life: the bread
and wine are not such as we have been accustomed to, and are so bad that
we loathe to touch them; water, coffee, butter, oil, and other articles,
are either not to be procured, or are scarcely fit for use: a bath,
which is so necessary to the Emperor’s health, is not to be had; and he
is deprived of the exercise of riding on horseback.

His friends and servants are two miles distant from him, and are not
suffered to approach his person without being accompanied by a soldier.
They are deprived of their arms, and are compelled to pass the night at
the guard-house, if they return beyond a certain hour, or if any mistake
occur in the pass-word, which happens almost daily. Thus, on the summit
of this frightful rock, we are equally exposed to the severity of man
and the rigour of nature! And how easy would it have been to procure us
a more suitable retreat and more courteous usage. Assuredly, if the
Sovereigns of Europe decreed this exile, private enmity has directed its
execution. If policy alone dictated this measure as indispensable, would
it not have been essential, in order to render the fact evident to the
world, to have surrounded with every kind of respect and consideration
the illustrious victim, with regard to whom it had been found necessary
to violate law and principle?

We were all assembled round the Emperor; and he was recapitulating these
facts with warmth: “For what infamous treatment are we reserved!” he
exclaimed. “This is the anguish of death! To injustice and violence,
they now add insult and protracted torment. If I were so hateful to
them, why did they not get rid of me? A few musquet balls in my heart or
my head would have done the business; and there would at least have been
some energy in the crime! Were it not for you, and, above all, for your
wives, I would receive from them nothing but the pay of a private
soldier. How can the monarchs of Europe permit the sacred character of
sovereignty to be violated in my person? Do they not see that they are,
with their own hands, working their own destruction at St. Helena? I
entered their capitals victorious, and had I cherished such sentiments,
what would have become of them? They styled me their brother; and I had
become so by the choice of the people, the sanction of victory, the
character of religion, and the alliances of their policy and their
blood. Do they imagine that the good sense of nations is blind to their
conduct? and what do they expect from it? At all events, make your
complaints, gentlemen; let indignant Europe hear them! Complaints from
me would be beneath my dignity and character; I must command, or be
silent.”

Next morning an officer, opening the door, introduced himself, without
farther ceremony, into the Emperor’s room, where I was engaged with him.
He had come, however, with good intentions. He was the captain of one of
the small vessels which had formed our squadron. He was now about to
return to Europe, and came to enquire whether the Emperor had any
commands. Napoleon immediately recurred to the subject of our
conversation on the preceding evening, and, becoming animated by
degrees, gave utterance to sentiments of the loftiest and most energetic
character, which he charged him to communicate to the British
Government. I interpreted what he said in the same spirit and with great
rapidity. The officer seemed astonished at what he heard, and left us
with a promise punctually to fulfil his commission. But he could not
have described the expression, and particularly the tone, of which I was
a witness.—The Emperor, however, directed me to make a memorandum of
what he had said, which the officer must have found very feebly
expressed compared with what he had just heard. The note was as follows:

Memorandum.—“The Emperor desires, by the return of the next vessel, to
receive some account of his wife and son, and to be informed whether the
latter is still living. He takes this opportunity of repeating and
conveying to the British Government the protestations which he has
already made against the extraordinary measures adopted towards him.

“1st. That Government has declared him a prisoner of war. The Emperor is
not a prisoner of war. His letter to the Prince Regent, which he wrote
and communicated to Captain Maitland, before he went on board the
Bellerophon, sufficiently proves, to the whole world, the resolutions
and the sentiments of confidence which induced him freely to place
himself under the English flag.

“The Emperor might, had he pleased, have agreed to quit France only on
stipulated conditions with regard to himself; but he disdained to mingle
personal considerations with the great interests with which his mind was
constantly occupied. He might have placed himself at the disposal of the
Emperor Alexander, who had been his friend, or of the Emperor Francis,
who was his father-in-law. But, confiding in the justice of the English
nation, he desired no other protection than its laws afforded; and,
renouncing public affairs, he sought no other country than that which
was governed by fixed laws, independent of private will.

“2nd. Had the Emperor really been a prisoner of war, the rights which
civilized governments possess over such a prisoner are limited by the
law of nations, and terminate with the war itself.

“3rd. If the English Government considered the Emperor, though
arbitrarily, as a prisoner of war, the right of that government was then
limited by public law, or else, as there existed no cartel between the
two nations during the war, it might have adopted towards him the
principles of savages, who put their prisoners to death. This proceeding
would have been more humane, and more conformable to justice, than that
of sending him to this horrible rock; death inflicted on board the
Bellerophon, in the Plymouth roads, would have been a blessing compared
with the treatment to which he is now subjected.

“We have travelled over the most desolate countries of Europe, but none
is to be compared to this barren rock. Deprived of every thing that can
render life supportable, it is calculated only to renew perpetually the
anguish of death. The first principles of Christian morality, and that
great duty imposed on man to pursue his fate, whatever it may be, may
withhold him from terminating with his own hand a wretched existence;
the Emperor glories in being superior to such a feeling. But if the
British Ministry should persist in their course of injustice and
violence towards him, he would consider it a happiness if they would put
him to death.”

The vessel which sailed for Europe, with this document, was the Redpole,
Captain Desmond.

The reader must pardon the insipid monotony of our complaints: they will
be found to be always the same, no doubt; but let it be remembered how
much more pain must have been felt in repeating them than can possibly
be experienced in their perusal.

MODE OF LIVING AT BRIARS.—CABINET WHICH THE EMPEROR HAD WITH HIM AT
    AUSTERLITZ.—THE EMPEROR’S LARGE CABINET.—ITS CONTENTS.—ARTICLES OF
    VIRTÙ, LIBELS AGAINST NAPOLEON, &C., LEFT AT THE TUILERIES BY THE
    KING.

25th—27th. The Emperor dressed very early; he took a short walk out of
doors; we breakfasted about ten o’clock; he walked again, and then we
proceeded to business. I read to him what he had dictated on the
preceding evening, and which my son had copied in the morning; he
corrected it, and then continued his dictation. We went out again about
five o’clock, and returned at six, the hour appointed for dinner, that
is to say, if the dinner should be brought from the town by that time.
The days were very long, and the evenings still longer. Unfortunately I
did not understand chess; at one time I had an idea of studying it by
night, but where could I find a teacher? I pretended to a little
knowledge of piquet, but the Emperor soon discovered my ignorance: he
gave me credit for my good intentions, yet he gave up playing. Want of
occupation would sometimes lead him to the neighbouring house, where the
young ladies made him play at whist. But his more usual practice was to
remain at table after dinner, and to converse sitting in his chair; for
the room was too small to admit of his walking about.

One evening he ordered a little travelling cabinet to be brought to him,
and, after minutely examining every part of it, he presented it to me,
saying, “I have had it in my possession a long time, I made use of it on
the morning of the battle of Austerlitz. It must go to young Emanuel,”
said he, turning to my son; “when he is thirty or forty years old, we
shall be no more. This will but enhance the value of the gift; he will
say when he shews it, the Emperor Napoleon gave this to my father at St.
Helena.” I received the precious gift with a kind of reverential
feeling, and I preserve it as a valuable relic.

Passing from that to the examining of a large cabinet, he looked over
some portraits of his own family, and some presents which he had
personally received. These consisted of the portraits of Madame, of the
Queen of Naples, of the daughters of Joseph, of his brothers, of the
King of Rome, &c.; an Augustus and a Livia, both exceedingly rare; a
Continence of Scipio and another antique of immense value given to him
by the Pope; a Peter the Great, on a box; another box with a Charles V.;
another with a Turenne; and some, which were in daily use, covered with
a collection of medallions of Cæsar, Alexander, Sylla, Mithridates, &c.
Next came some snuff-boxes, ornamented with his own portrait set in
diamonds. He then looked for one without diamonds, and not finding it,
he called his valet-de-chambre to enquire about it: unfortunately this
portrait still remained in the town along with the greater part of his
effects; I felt mortified at receiving this intelligence, I could not
help thinking that I had been a loser by this mischance.

The Emperor then examined several snuff-boxes which Louis XVIII. had
left on his table at the Tuileries at the time of his precipitate
departure. On one of these were represented, on a black ground, the
portraits of Louis XVI., of the Queen, and of Madame Elizabeth, executed
in paste in imitation of ivory, and fantastically arranged. They formed
three crescents placed back to back in the shape of an equilateral
triangle, and groups of cherubs closely interwoven composed the external
border. Another box presented a water-colour sketch of a hunt, which had
no other claim to merit than the circumstance of its being attributed to
the pencil of the Duchess of Angoulême. A third was surmounted with a
portrait, which appeared to be that of the Countess of Provence. These
three boxes were of simple and even ordinary execution; and could
possess no other value than that which their history attaches to them.

On the Emperor’s arrival in Paris on the evening of the 20th of March,
he found the King’s study precisely in the state in which it had been
used; all his papers still remained on the tables. By the Emperor’s
desire, these tables were pushed into the corners of the apartment, and
others brought. He gave orders that nothing should be touched, intending
to examine the papers at his leisure: and as the Emperor himself quitted
France without returning to the Tuileries, the King must have found his
study and his papers nearly as he had left them.

The Emperor took a hasty glance at some of the papers. He found among
them several letters from the King to M. d’Avary at Madeira, where the
latter died; they were written in the King’s own hand, and had doubtless
been sent back to him. He found also some confidential letters of the
King’s, likewise in his own hand. But how came they there? How had they
been returned to him? That would be difficult to explain. They consisted
of five or six pages, written in very elegant language, and displaying
some sense; but very abstract and metaphysical. In one of them, the
Prince said to the lady whom he addressed:—“_Judge, Madam, how much I
love you; I have left off mourning for your sake._” “And here,” said the
Emperor, “the idea of the mourning was followed up by a succession of
long paragraphs, quite in an academic style.” The Emperor could not
imagine to whom it had been written, or what the _mourning_ alluded to;
I could not assist his conjectures on either of these points.

Two or three days after the Emperor had replaced a certain individual at
the head of a celebrated institution, he found on one of the tables a
memoir from that very person, which, from the terms in which it was
couched with reference to himself and the whole of his family, would
certainly have prevented him from signing the re-appointment.

There were also many other documents of the same nature: but the most
complete records of baseness, deceit, and villany, were found in the
apartments of M. Blacas, grand-master of the wardrobe, and minister of
the household: these were filled with plans, reports, and petitions of
every kind. There were few of these papers in which the writers did not
put themselves forward at the expense of Napoleon, whom they were far
from expecting to return. They formed altogether such a mass that the
Emperor was obliged to appoint a committee of four persons to examine
them; he now thinks he was to blame in not having confided that office
to a single individual, and with such injunctions that he might have
felt confident nothing was suffered to escape. He has since had reason
to believe that these papers might have afforded some salutary hints
respecting the treachery which surrounded him on his return from
Waterloo.

Among the rest there was a long letter from one of the female attendants
of the Princess Pauline. This voluminous letter was expressed in very
coarse language with regard to the princess and her sisters; and
described the Emperor, to whom the writer always alluded under the title
of _that man_, in the worst possible colours. This had not been thought
sufficient; part of it had been erased and interlined by another hand,
in order to bring forward Napoleon in the most scandalous manner; and on
the margin, in the hand of the interlineator, were written the words
_fit to be printed_. A few days more, and this libel would probably have
been published.

An upstart woman, who held a distinguished rank in the state, and who
had been overwhelmed with acts of kindness from the Emperor, wrote in a
great hurry to her friend, another upstart, to acquaint her with the
famous decision of the Senate respecting the forfeiture and proscription
of Napoleon. The letter contained the following: “My dear friend, my
husband has just returned: he is tired to death; but his efforts have
carried it; we are delivered from _that man_, and we shall have the
Bourbons. Thank God, we shall now be real Countesses!” &c.

Among these papers, Napoleon experienced the mortification to meet with
some containing very improper remarks respecting himself personally; and
those too in the very hand writing of individuals who only the day
before had assembled round him, and were already in the enjoyment of his
favours.

The first impulse of his indignation was to determine that they should
be printed, and to withdraw his protection: a second thought restrained
him. “We are so volatile, so inconstant, so easily led away,” said he,
“that, after all, I could not be certain that those very people had not
really and spontaneously come back to my service: in that case, I should
have been punishing them at the very time when they were returning to
their duty. I thought it better to seem to know nothing of the matter,
and I ordered all their letters to be burnt.”

THE EMPEROR COMMENCES THE CAMPAIGN OF EGYPT WITH THE GRAND
  MARSHAL.—ANECDOTES OF BRUMAIRE, &C.—LETTEF THE COUNT DE LILLE.—THE
  BEAUTIFUL DUCHESS DE GUICHE.

28th—31st. My son and I prosecuted our labours without intermission. His
health, however, began to be affected; he felt a pain in his chest. My
eyes also grew weak: these were really the effects of our excessive
occupation. Indeed, we had gone through an amazing quantity of work: we
had already nearly arrived at the end of the Campaign of Italy. The
Emperor, however, did not yet find that he had sufficient occupation.
Employment was his only resource, and the interest which his first
dictations had assumed furnished an additional motive for proceeding
with them. The Campaign of Egypt was now about to be commenced. The
Emperor had frequently talked of employing the Grand Marshal on this
subject.

Those of our party who were lodged in the town were badly accommodated,
and were dissatisfied at being separated from the Emperor. They were
harassed by the constraint and mortifications to which they were
subjected. I suggested to the Emperor that he should set us all to work
at the same time, and proceed at once with the Campaigns of Italy and
Egypt, the history of the Consulate, the return from the Island of Elba,
&c. The time, I observed, would then pass more quickly; this great work,
the glory of France, would advance more rapidly, and the gentlemen who
resided in the town would be less unhappy. The idea pleased the Emperor,
and from that moment one or two of his suite came regularly every day to
write from his dictation, the transcript of which they brought to him
next morning. They then stayed to dinner, and thus afforded the Emperor
a little more amusement.

We made such arrangements that the Emperor insensibly found himself more
comfortably situated in many respects. A tent, which had been given to
me by the Colonel of the 53rd regiment, was spread out so as to form a
prolongation of the room occupied by the Emperor. His cook took up his
abode at Briars. The table-linen was taken from the trunks, the plate
was set forth, and our first dinner after these preparations was a sort
of _fête_. The evenings, however, always hung heavily on our hands. The
Emperor would sometimes visit the adjoining house; at other times he
would endeavour to leave his chamber to walk; but more frequently he
remained within-doors, and tried to pass the time in conversation until
ten or eleven o’clock. He dreaded retiring to bed too early; for when he
did so, he awoke in the night; and, in order to divert his mind from
sorrowful reflections, he was obliged to rise and read.

One day at dinner the Emperor cast his eyes on one of the dishes of his
own campaign-service, on which the Royal arms had been engraved. “How
they have spoiled this!” he exclaimed in very energetic terms; and he
could not refrain from observing that the King had been in a great hurry
to take possession of the Imperial plate, which he certainly could not
claim as having been taken from him, since it unquestionably belonged to
him, Napoleon; for, he added, that when he ascended the throne he found
not a vestige of royal property. At his abdication he left to the crown
five millions in plate, and between forty and fifty millions in
furniture, which was all purchased with his own money out of his civil
list.

In a conversation one evening, the Emperor related the circumstances
attending the event of Brumaire. I suppress the particulars, because
they were afterwards dictated to General Gourgaud; and a detailed
account of this remarkable affair will be found in the Memoirs.

Sieyes, who was one of the Provisional Consuls along with Napoleon,
astonished to hear his colleague, on the very first conference,
discussing questions relative to finance, administration, the army, law,
and politics, left him, quite disconcerted, and ran to his friends,
saying, “Gentlemen, you have got a master! This man knows every thing,
wills every thing, and can do every thing.”

I was in London at that time, and I told the Emperor that the emigrants
there had formed great hopes and placed much confidence on the events of
the 18th of Brumaire and on his Consulate. Several of us, who had
formerly been acquainted with Madame de Beauharnois, immediately set out
for Paris, hoping, through her means, to exercise some influence, or
give some direction to affairs, which then appeared under a new aspect.

Our general opinion at the time was that the First Consul had waited for
propositions from the French Princes. We grounded this opinion on the
circumstance of his having been so long without manifesting his
intentions respecting them; which, however, he did some time afterwards
in a way the most overwhelming, by means of a proclamation. We
attributed this result to the stupid conduct of the Bishop of Arras, the
counsellor and director of our affairs; who, according to his own
confession, went to work with his eyes shut, and boasted of not having
read a single newspaper for a series of years, ever since they had been
filled, as he said, with the successes and the falsehoods of those
wretches. On the first establishment of the Consulate, some one having
attempted to persuade the Bishop to enter into negotiations with the
Consul, through the mediation of Madame Buonaparte, he rejected the
proposition with indignation, and in language of so coarse and
disgusting a nature as induced the person to tell him that his
expressions were far from being episcopal, and that he certainly had
never learned them from his breviary.

About the same period he made use of some gross invectives against the
Duc de Choiseuil,—and that too at the table of the Prince, where he was
smartly reprimanded for them; and all this was only because the Duke, on
being released from imprisonment at Calais, and escaping death through
the protection of the Consul, concluded his reply to the enquiries made
by the Prince relative to Buonaparte, by protesting that, for his part,
he should never cease to acknowledge his personal gratitude towards him.

To all this the Emperor replied that he had never bestowed a thought on
the Princes; that the observations to which I had alluded proceeded from
one of the other Consuls, and were made without any particular motive;
that we, who were abroad, seemed to have no idea of the opinions of
those at home; and that even if he had been favourably disposed towards
the Princes, it would not have been in his power to carry his intentions
into execution. He had, however, received overtures, about that period,
both from Mittau and London.

The King, he said, wrote him a letter, which was conveyed to him by
Lebrun, who had it from the Abbé de Montesquiou, the secret agent of the
Prince at Paris. This letter, which was written in a very laboured
style, contained the following paragraph: “You delay long to restore me
my throne. It is to be feared that you may allow favourable moments to
escape. You cannot complete the happiness of France without me, nor can
I serve France without you. Hasten, then, and specify yourself the
places which you would wish your friends to possess.”

To this letter the First Consul replied:—“I have received your Royal
Highness’s letter; I have always felt deep interest in your misfortunes
and those of your family. You must not think of appearing in France; you
could not do so without passing over a hundred thousand dead bodies. I
shall, however, be always eager to do every thing that may tend to
alleviate your fate, or enable you to forget your misfortunes.”

The overtures made by the Count d’Artois possessed still more elegance
and address. He commissioned, as the bearer of them, the Duchess de
Guiche, a lady whose fascinating manners and personal graces were
calculated to assist her in the important negotiation. She easily got
access to Madame Buonaparte, with whom all the individuals of the old
Court came easily in contact. She breakfasted with her at Malmaison; and
the conversation turning on London, the emigrants, and the French
Princes, Madame de Guiche mentioned that as she happened a few days
before to be at the house of the Count d’Artois, she had heard some
person ask the Prince what he intended to do for the First Consul, in
the event of his restoring the Bourbons; and that the Prince had
replied:—“I would immediately make him Constable of the kingdom, and
every thing else he might choose. But even that would not be enough: we
would raise on the Carrousel a lofty and magnificent column, surmounted
with a statue of Buonaparte crowning the Bourbons.”

As soon as the First Consul entered, which he did very shortly after
breakfast, Josephine eagerly repeated to him the circumstance which the
Duchess had related. “And did you not reply,” said her husband, “that
the corpse of the First Consul would have been made the pedestal of the
Column?”—The charming Duchess was still present; the beauties of her
countenance, her eyes, and her words, were directed to the success of
her commission. She said she was so delighted she did not know how she
should ever be able sufficiently to acknowledge the favour which Madame
Buonaparte had procured her, of seeing and hearing so distinguished a
man—so great a hero. It was all in vain: the Duchess de Guiche received
orders that very night to quit Paris. The charms of the emissary were
too well calculated to alarm Josephine, to induce her to say any thing
very urgent in her favour, and next day the Duchess was on her way to
the frontier.

It is, however, absolutely false that Napoleon, on his part, at a
subsequent period, made overtures or propositions to the Princes
touching the cession of their rights, or their renunciation of the
Crown; though such statements have been made in some pompous
declarations, profusely circulated through Europe.—How was such a thing
possible?” said the Emperor; “I, who could only reign by the very
principle which excluded them—that of the sovereignty of the people—how
could I have sought to possess through them rights which were proscribed
in their persons! That would have been to proscribe myself. The
absurdity would have been too palpable, too ridiculous; it would have
ruined me for ever in public opinion. The fact is that neither directly
nor indirectly, at home or abroad, did I ever do any thing of the kind:
and this will no doubt, in the course of time, be the opinion of all
persons of judgment, who allow me to have been neither a fool nor a
madman.

“The prevalence of this report, however, induced me to seek to discover
what could have given rise to it, and these are the facts which I
collected:—at the period of the good understanding between France and
Prussia, and while that state was endeavouring to ingratiate herself in
our favour, she caused inquiry to be made whether France would take
umbrage at her allowing the French Princes to remain in the Prussian
territories, to which the French Government answered in the negative.
Emboldened by this reply, Prussia next enquired whether we should feel
any great repugnance to furnish them, through her medium, with an annual
allowance. To this our government also replied in the negative, provided
that Prussia would be responsible for their remaining quiet, and
abstaining from all intrigue. The negotiation of this affair being once
set on foot between the two countries, Heaven knows what the zeal of
some agent, or even the doctrines of the Court of Berlin, which did not
accord with ours, may have proposed. This furnished, no doubt, the
motive and pretext, if indeed any really existed, for the fine letter of
Louis XVIII., to which all the members of his family so ostentatiously
adhered. The French Princes eagerly seized that opportunity of reviving
the interest and attention of Europe, which had been by this time
totally withdrawn from them.”

           OCCUPATIONS OF THE DAY.—COUNCIL OF STATE.—DISGRACE
              OF PORTALIS.—DISSOLUTION OF THE LEGISLATIVE
                       BODY, IN 1813.—THE SENATE.

November 1st—4th. Our days now passed away in the same uniformity as
those which we spent on board the vessel. The Emperor summoned me to
breakfast with him about ten or eleven o’clock. That meal being
concluded, after half an hour’s conversation, I read to him what he had
dictated the evening before, and he renewed his dictations. The Emperor
discontinued his practice of dressing as soon as he rose, and walking
before breakfast, which had broken up his day too much, and rendered it
too long. He never dressed now till about four o’clock. He then walked
out, to give the servants an opportunity of making his bed, and cleaning
his room. We walked in the garden, which he particularly liked, on
account of its solitude. I had the little arbour covered with a canvass,
and ordered a table and chairs to be placed in it; and the Emperor
henceforward chose this spot for dictating to such of the gentlemen as
came from the town for that purpose.

In front of Mr. Balcombe’s house there was a walk bordered by some
trees. It was here that the two English soldiers had posted themselves
for the purpose of watching us. They were, however, at length removed,
by desire of Mr. Balcombe, who felt offended at the circumstance on his
own account. Nevertheless, they still continued for some time to move
about, so as to get a sight of the Emperor; either attracted by
curiosity, or acting in obedience to their orders. At length they
entirely disappeared, and the Emperor gradually took possession of this
lower walk. This was quite an acquisition to his domain; and he walked
here every day before dinner. The two young ladies, with their mother,
joined him in this walk, and told him the news. He sometimes returned to
the garden after dinner, when the weather permitted; he was then enabled
to spend the evening without paying a visit to his neighbours, which he
never did when he could avoid it, nor ever till he was satisfied that no
stranger was there, which I always ascertained previously, by peeping
through the window.

In one of his walks, the Emperor conversed much on the subject of the
Senate, the Legislative Body, and particularly the Council of State. The
latter, he said, had been of considerable service to him during the
whole course of his administration. I will here note down some remarks
relative to the Council of State, the more readily, as it was very
little understood at the time in the drawing-rooms of Paris; and as it
does not now exist on the same footing as formerly, I shall insert, as I
proceed, a few lines on its mechanism and prerogatives.

“The Council of State,” said the Emperor, “was generally composed of
well-informed, skilful, and honest men. Fermont and Boulay, for example,
were certainly of this class. Notwithstanding the immense law-suits
which they conducted, and the vast emoluments they enjoyed, I should not
be surprised to learn that they are not now in very flourishing
circumstances.” The Emperor employed the councillors of state
individually in every case, and with advantage. As a whole, they were
his real council—his mind in deliberation, as the ministers were his
mind in execution. At the Council of State were prepared the laws which
the Emperor presented to the Legislative Body, a circumstance which
rendered it altogether one of the elements of the legislative power. In
the Council, the Emperor’s decrees and his rules of public
administration were drawn up; and there the plans of his ministers were
examined, discussed, and corrected.

The Council of State received appeals and pronounced finally on all
administrative judgments; and incidentally on those of all other
tribunals, even those of the Court of Cassation. There were examined
complaints against the ministers, and appeals from the Emperor to the
Emperor better informed. Thus the Council of State, at which the Emperor
uniformly presided, being frequently in direct opposition to the
ministers, or occupied in reforming their acts and errors, naturally
became the point of refuge for persons or interests aggrieved by any
authority whatever. All who were ever present at the meetings of the
council must know with what zeal the cause of the citizens was there
defended. A committee of the Council of State received all the petitions
of the Empire, and laid before the Sovereign those which deserved his
attention.

With the exception of lawyers and persons employed in the
administration, it is surprising how far the rest of society were
ignorant of our political legislation. No one had a correct idea of the
Council of State, of the Legislative Body, or of the Senate. It was
received, for example, as an established fact, that the Legislative
Body, like an assembly of mutes, passively adopted, without the least
opposition, all the laws which were presented to it; that which belonged
to the nature and excellence of the institution was attributed to its
complaisance and servility.

The laws which were prepared in the Council of State were presented by
commissioners, chosen from that council, to a committee of the
Legislative Body appointed to receive them; they were there amicably
discussed, and were often quietly referred back to the Council of State
to receive some modifications. When the two deputations could not come
to an understanding, they proceeded to hold regular conferences, under
the presidency of the Arch-chancellor or the Arch-treasurer; so that,
before these laws reached the Legislative Body, they had already
received the assent of the two opposite parties. If any difference
existed, it was discussed by the two committees, in the presence of the
whole of the Legislative Body, performing the functions of a jury;
which, as soon as its members had become sufficiently acquainted with
the facts, pronounced its decision by a secret scrutiny. Thus every
individual had an opportunity of freely giving his opinion, as it was
impossible to know whether he had put in a black or a white ball. “No
plan,” said the Emperor, “could have been better calculated to correct
our national effervescence and our inexperience in matters of political
liberty.”

The Emperor asked me whether I thought discussion perfectly free in the
Council of State, or whether his presence did not impose a restraint on
the deliberations? I reminded him of a very long debate, during which he
had remained throughout singular in his opinion, and had at last been
obliged to yield. He immediately recollected the circumstance. “Oh,
yes,” said he, “that must have been in the case of a woman of Amsterdam,
who had been tried for her life and acquitted three several times by the
Imperial Courts, but against whom a fresh trial was demanded in the
Court of Cassation.” The Emperor hoped that this happy concurrence of
the law might have exhausted its severity in favour of the prisoner;
that this lucky fatality of circumstances might have turned to her
advantage. It was urged in reply that he possessed the beneficent power
of bestowing pardon; but that the law was inflexible, and must take its
course. The debate was a very long one. M. Muraire spoke a great deal,
and very much to the point; he persuaded every one except the Emperor,
who still remained singular in his opinion, and at length yielded, with
these remarkable words:—“Gentlemen, the decision goes by the majority
here, I remain single, and must yield; but I declare, in my conscience,
that I yield only to forms. You have reduced me to silence, but by no
means convinced me.”

So little was the nature of the Council of State understood by people in
general that it was believed no one dared utter a word in that assembly
in opposition to the Emperor’s opinion. Thus I very much surprised many
persons when I related the fact that, one day, during a very animated
debate, the Emperor, having been interrupted three times in giving his
opinion, turned towards the individual who had rather rudely cut him
short, and said in a sharp tone: “I have not yet done; I beg you will
allow me to continue. I believe every one here has a right to deliver
his opinion.” The smartness of this reply, notwithstanding the solemnity
of the occasion, excited a general laugh, in which the Emperor himself
joined.

“Yet,” said I to him, “the speakers evidently sought to discover what
might be your Majesty’s opinion: they seemed to congratulate themselves
when their views coincided with yours, and to be embarrassed on finding
themselves maintaining opposite sentiments. You were accused, too, of
laying snares for us, in order to discover our real opinion.” However,
when the question was once started, self-love and the warmth of argument
contributed, along with the freedom of discussion which the Emperor
encouraged, to induce every one to maintain his own opinion. “I do not
mind being contradicted,” said the Emperor; “I seek to be informed.
Speak boldly,” he would repeat, whenever the speaker expressed himself
equivocally, or the subject was a delicate one; “tell me all that you
think; we are alone here; we are all _en famille_.”

I have been informed that, under the Consulate, or at the commencement
of the Empire, the Emperor opposed an opinion of one of the members,
and, through the warmth and obstinacy of the latter, the affair at
length amounted absolutely to a personal misunderstanding. Napoleon
commanded his temper, and was silent; but a few days after, seeing his
antagonist at one of the public audiences, he said to him, in a
half-earnest manner, “You are extremely obstinate; and if I were equally
so!——At all events, you are in the wrong to put power to the trial! You
should not be unmindful of human weakness!”

On another occasion, he said in private to one of the members who had
likewise driven him to the utmost extreme, “You must take a little more
care to consult my temper. You lately rather exceeded the bounds of
discretion: you obliged me to have recourse to scratching my forehead.
That is a very ominous sign with me: avoid urging me so far for the
future.”

Nothing could equal the interest which the presence and the words of the
Emperor excited in the Council of State. He presided there regularly
twice a week when he was in town, and then none of us would have been
absent for the whole world.

I told the Emperor that two sittings in particular had made the deepest
impression on me: one entirely of sentiment, relating to matters of
internal police, in which he had expelled one of the members of the
Council; the other of constitutional decision, in which he had dissolved
the Legislative Body.

A religious party was fomenting civil discord in the State, by secretly
circulating bulls and letters from the Pope. They were shewn to a
Councillor of State, appointed to superintend religious worship; and
who, if he did not himself circulate them, at least neither prevented
nor denounced their circulation. This was discovered, and the Emperor
suddenly challenged him with the fact in open Council. “What could have
been your motive, sir?” said he: “were you influenced by your religious
principles? If so, why are you here? I use no control over the
conscience of any man. Did I force you to become my Councillor of State?
On the contrary, you solicited the post as a high favour. You are the
youngest member of the Council, and perhaps the only one who has not
some personal claim to that honour; you had nothing to recommend you but
the inheritance of your father’s services. You took a personal oath to
me; how could your religious feelings permit you openly to violate that
oath, as you have just now done? Speak, however; you are here in
confidence: your colleagues shall be your judges. Your crime is a great
one, sir. A conspiracy for the commission of a violent act is stopped as
soon as we seize the arm that holds the poniard. But a conspiracy to
influence the public mind has no en: it is like a train of gunpowder.
Perhaps, at this very moment, whole towns are thrown into commotion
through your fault!” The Councillor, quite confused, said nothing in
reply: the first word had sufficed to convict him. The members of the
council, to the majority of whom this event was quite unexpected, were
struck with astonishment, and observed profound silence.—“Why,”
continued the Emperor, “did you not, according to the obligation imposed
by your oath, discover to me the criminal and his plots? Am I not at all
times accessible to everyone of you?” “Sire,” said the Councillor, at
length venturing to reply, “he was my cousin.”—“Your crime is then the
greater, sir,” replied the Emperor sharply; “your kinsman could only
have been placed in office at your solicitation: from that moment all
the responsibility devolved on you. When I look upon a man as entirely
devoted to me, as your situation ought to render you, all who are
connected with him, and all for whom he becomes responsible, from that
time require no watching. These are my maxims.” The accused member still
remained silent, and the Emperor continued: “The duties which a
Councillor of State owes to me are immense. You, sir, have violated
those duties, and you hold the office no longer. Begone: let me never
see you here again!” The disgraced Councillor, as he was withdrawing,
passed very near the Emperor: the latter looked at him and said, “I am
sincerely grieved at this, sir, for the services of your father are
still fresh in my memory.” When he was gone, the Emperor added, “I hope
such a scene as this may never be renewed; it has done me too much
harm.—I am not distrustful, but I might become so! I have allowed myself
to be surrounded by every party; I have placed near my person even
emigrants and soldiers of the army of Condé; and, though it was wished
to induce them to assassinate me, yet, to do them justice, they have
continued faithful. Since I have held the reins of government, this is
the first individual employed about me, by whom I have been betrayed.”
And then, turning towards M. Locré, who took notes of the debates of the
Council of State, he said, “write down _betrayed_—do you hear?”

What an interesting collection were those reports of M. Locré! What has
become of them? All that I have here related would be found in them word
for word.

With respect to the dissolution of the Legislative Body, the Council of
State was convoked either on the last day, or the last day but one of
December, 1813. We knew that the debate would be an important one,
without however knowing its object: the crisis was of the most serious
nature, the enemy was entering on the French territory.

“Gentlemen,” said the Emperor, “you are aware of the situation of
affairs, and the dangers to which the country is exposed. I thought it
right, without being obliged to do so, to forward a private
communication on the subject to the Deputies of the Legislative Body. I
wished thus to have associated them with their dearest interests: but
they have converted this act of my confidence into a weapon against me;
that is to say, against the country. Instead of assisting me with all
their efforts, they seek to obstruct mine. Our attitude alone would be
sufficient to check the advance of the enemy, while their conduct
invites him; instead of shewing him a front of brass, they unveil to him
our wounds. They stun me with their clamorous demands for peace, while
the only means to obtain it was to recommend war; they complain of me,
and speak of their grievances; but what time, what place, do they select
for so doing? These are subjects to be discussed in private, and not in
the presence of the enemy. Was I inaccessible to them? Did I ever shew
myself incapable of arguing reasonably? It is time, however, to come to
a resolution: the Legislative Body, instead of assisting me in saving
France, wishes to accelerate her ruin. The Legislative Body has betrayed
its duty—I fulfil mine—I dissolve it.”

He then ordered the reading of a decree, the purport of which was that
two-fifths of the Legislative Body had already gone beyond their power;
that on the first of January another fifth would be in the same
situation, and that consequently the majority of the Legislative Body
would then be composed of members who had no right to be in it; that, in
consideration of these circumstances, it was, from that moment,
prorogued and adjourned, until fresh elections should be made.

After the reading of this document, the Emperor continued: “Such is the
decree which I issue; and were I assured that it would bring the people
of Paris in a crowd to the Tuileries to murder me this very day, I would
still issue it; for such is my duty. When the people of France placed
their destinies in my hands, I took into consideration the laws by which
I was to govern them: had I thought those laws insufficient, I should
not have accepted them. I am not a Louis XVI. Daily vacillations must
not be expected from me. Though I have become Emperor, I have not ceased
to be a citizen. If anarchy were to resume her sway, I would abdicate
and mingle with the crowd to enjoy my share of the sovereignty, rather
than remain at the head of a system in which I should only compromise
all, without being able to protect any one. Besides,” concluded he, “my
determination is conformable to the law; and if every one here will do
his duty this day, I shall be invincible behind the shelter of the law
as well as before the enemy.” But, alas! every one did not perform his
duty!

Contrary to the received opinion, the Emperor was far from being of an
arbitrary temper, and he was so willing to make concessions to his
Council of State that he has frequently been known to submit to
discussion, or even to annul a decision that he had adopted, because one
of the members might afterwards privately advance new arguments, or hint
that the personal opinion of the Emperor had influenced the majority.
Let the chiefs of the sections be referred to on this head.

The Emperor was accustomed to communicate to members of the Institute
every scientific idea that occurred to him, and also to submit his
political ideas to Councillors of State: he often did this with private,
and even secret, views. It was a sure way, he said, to go to the heart
of a question; to ascertain the powers of a man and his political bias;
to take measure of his discretion, &c. I know that in the year XII. he
submitted to three Councillors of State the consideration of a very
extraordinary question: namely, the suppression of the Legislative Body.
It was approved by the majority; but one opposed it strenuously; he
spoke at great length, and much to the purpose. The Emperor, who had
listened to the discussion with great attention and gravity, without
uttering a single word, or suffering any indication of his opinion to
escape him, closed the sitting by observing, “A question of so serious a
nature deserves to be maturely considered; we will resume the subject.”
But it was never again brought forward.

It would have been well had the same precautions been adopted at the
time of the suppression of the Tribunate; for that has always continued
to be a great subject of declamation and reproach. As for the Emperor,
he viewed it merely as the suppression of an expensive abuse, and an
important economical measure.

“It is certain,” said he, “that the Tribunate was absolutely useless,
while it cost nearly half a million; I therefore suppressed it. I was
well aware that an outcry would be raised against the violation of the
law; but I was strong: I possessed the full confidence of the people,
and I considered myself a reformer. This at least is certain, that I did
all for the best. I should, on the contrary, have created the Tribunate,
had I been hypocritical or evil-disposed; for who can doubt that it
would have adopted and sanctioned, when necessary, my views and
intentions? But that was what I never sought after in the whole course
of my administration. I never purchased any vote or decision by
promises, money, or places; and if I distributed favours to ministers,
councillors of state, and legislators, it was because there were things
to give away, and it was natural and even just that they should be dealt
out among those whose avocations brought them in contact with me.

“In my time all constituted bodies were pure and irreproachable: and I
can firmly declare that they acted from conviction. Malevolence and
folly may have asserted the contrary; but without ground. If those
bodies were condemned, it was by persons who knew them not, or wished
not to know them: and the reproaches that were levelled at them, must be
attributed to the discontent or opposition of the time; and above all,
to that spirit of envy, detraction, and ridicule, which is so peculiarly
natural to the French people. The Senate has been much abused; great
outcry has been raised against its servility and baseness; but
declamation is not proof. What was the Senate expected to do? To refuse
conscripts? Was it wished that the committees of personal liberty and of
the liberty of the press should bring disgrace upon the Government? or
that the Senate should do what was done in 1813 by a committee of the
Legislative body? But where did that measure lead us? I doubt whether
the French people are now very grateful for it. The truth is that we
were placed in forced and unnatural circumstances: men of understanding
knew this, and accommodated themselves to the urgency of the moment. It
is not known that, in almost every important measure, the senators,
before they gave their vote, came to communicate to me privately, and
sometimes very decidedly, their objections, and even their refusal; and
they went away convinced either by my arguments or by the necessity and
urgency of affairs. If I never gave publicity to this fact, it was
because I governed conscientiously, and because I despised quackery, and
every thing like it.

“The votes of the Senate was always unanimous, because their conviction
was universal. Endeavours were made at the time to cry up an
insignificant minority, whom the hypocritical praises of malevolence,
together with their own vanity, or some other perversity of character,
excited to harmless opposition. But did the individuals composing that
minority evince, in the last crisis, either sound heads or sincere
hearts? I once more repeat that the career of the Senate was
irreproachable; the moment of its fall was alone disgraceful and
culpable. Without right, without power, and in violation of every
principle, the Senate surrendered France, and accomplished her ruin.
That body was the sport of high intriguers, whose interest it was to
discredit and degrade it, and to ruin one of the great bases of the
modern system. It may be truly said that they succeeded completely; for
I know of no body that ought to be described in history with more
ignominy than the French Senate. However, it is but just to observe that
the stain rests not on the majority, and that among the delinquents
there was a multitude of foreigners, who will at least be in future
indifferent to our honour and interests.”

On the arrival of the Count d’Artois, the Council of State exerted every
effort to attract his attention, and secure his favour. A deputation of
the Council was twice presented to him, and permission was solicited to
send one to meet the King at Compèigne. To this solicitation the
Lieutenant-General of the kingdom replied, that the King would willingly
receive the individual members of the Council; but that the sending of a
deputation was a thing not to be thought of. It is true that the _gros
bonnets_, that is to say the Chiefs of the Section, were absent. All
this agitation had no other object than to insure the payment of their
salary, and, perhaps, the retention of their places. Thus the Council of
State immediately signed its adherence to the resolutions of the Senate,
avoiding, it is true, every expression that might be offensive to
Napoleon; “And you signed it,” said the Emperor. “No, Sire, I declined
signing that adherence, on the ground that it was an egregious piece of
folly to endeavour to remain successively the councillor and the
confidential servant of two antagonists; and that, besides, if the
conqueror were wise, the best pledge that could be offered to his notice
would be fidelity and respect towards the conquered party.”—“And you
reasoned rightly,” observed Napoleon.

5th.—Nearly all our party were assembled round the Emperor in the
garden. Those who were lodged in the town complained much of the
inconvenience and continual vexations to which they were exposed. The
Emperor, for the last fortnight, had laid down the rule of making no
communication on this head, except in writing, which he conceived to be
the manner most suitable and best calculated to produce the wished-for
result. He had drawn up a note on this subject, which should have been
delivered some days ago, but which had been neglected. He alluded
several times to this business, and in a tone of displeasure. All his
indirect arguments and observations applied to the Grand Marshal. The
latter at length took umbrage: for who is not rendered irritable by
misfortune? He expressed himself in rather pointed language. His wife,
who was standing near the garden-gate, despairing of being able to
appease the storm, withdrew. I had now an opportunity of observing how
the impressions produced by this circumstance succeeded each other with
rapidity in the Emperor’s mind. Reason, logic, and it may be added,
sentiment, always prevailed.—“If,” said he, “you did not deliver the
letter because you considered it to be couched in offensive terms, you
performed a duty of friendship; but surely this did not require a delay
of more than twenty-four hours. A fortnight has elapsed without your
mentioning it to me. If the plan was faulty, if the letter was
ill-expressed, why not have told me so? I should have assembled you all
to discuss the matter with me.”

We all stood near the arbour at the extremity of the path, while the
Emperor walked to and fro before us. At a moment, when he had gone to a
little distance from us, and was out of hearing, the Grand Marshal,
addressing himself to me, said:—“I fear I have expressed myself
improperly, and I am sorry for it.”—“We will leave you alone with him,”
said I; “you will soon make him forget the offence.” I accordingly
beckoned the other individuals who were present to leave the garden.

In the evening, the Emperor, conversing with me about the events of the
morning, said:—“It was after we had made it up with the Grand Marshal—It
was before the misunderstanding with the Grand Marshal,”—and other
things of the same sort, which proved that the affair had left no
impression on his heart.

THE GENERALS OF THE ARMY OF ITALY.—ANCIENT ARMIES.—GENGISKAN.—MODERN
  INVASIONS.—CHARACTER OF CONQUERORS.

6th.—The Emperor was somewhat unwell, and employed himself in writing in
his chamber. He dictated to me the portraits of the Generals of the army
of Italy—Massena, Augereau, Serrurier, &c. Massena was endowed with
extraordinary courage and firmness, which seemed to increase in excess
of danger. When conquered, he was always as ready to fight the battle
again as though he had been the conqueror. Augereau, on the contrary,
seemed to be tired and disheartened by victory, of which he always had
enough. His person, his manners, and his language, gave him the air of a
bravo. This, however, says the narration, he was far from being, when he
once found himself sated with honours and riches, which he had bestowed
upon himself on every occasion that offered, and by every means in his
power. Serrurier, who retained the manners and severity of an old major
of infantry, was an honest and trustworthy man; but an unfortunate
general, &c.

Among the various subjects of the day’s conversation, I note down what
the Emperor said respecting the armies of the Ancients. He asked whether
the accounts of the great armies mentioned in history were to be
credited. He was of opinion that those statements were false and absurd.
He placed no faith in the descriptions of the innumerable armies of the
Carthaginians in Sicily. “Such a multitude of troops,” he observed,
“would have been useless in so inconsiderable an enterprise; and if
Carthage could have assembled such a force, a still greater one would
have been raised in Hannibal’s expedition, which was of much greater
importance, but in which not more than forty or fifty thousand men were
employed.” He did not believe the accounts of the millions of men
composing the forces of Darius and Xerxes, which might have covered all
Greece, and which would doubtless have been subdivided into a multitude
of partial armies. He even doubted the whole of that brilliant period of
Greek history; and he regarded the famous Persian war only as a series
of those undecided actions, in which each party claims the victory.
Xerxes returned triumphant, after taking, burning, and destroying
Athens; and the Greeks exulted in their victory, because they had not
surrendered at Salamis. “With regard to the pompous accounts of the
conquests of the Greeks, and the defeat of their numberless enemies, it
must be recollected,” observed the Emperor, “that the Greeks, who wrote
them, were a vain and hyperbolical people; and that no Persian chronicle
has ever been produced to set our judgment right by contrary
statements.”

But the Emperor attached credit to Roman history, if not in its details,
at least in its results; because these were facts as clear as day-light.
He also believed the descriptions of the armies of Gengiskan and
Tamerlane, however numerous they are said to have been; because they
were followed by gregarious nations, who, on their part, were joined by
other wandering tribes as they advanced; “and it is not impossible,”
observed the Emperor, “that Europe may one day end thus. The revolution
produced by the Huns, the cause of which is unknown, because the tract
is lost in the desert, may at a future period be renewed.”

The situation of Russia is admirably calculated to assist her in
bringing about such a catastrophe. She may collect at will numberless
auxiliaries, and scatter them over Europe. The wandering tribes of the
north will be the better disposed and the more impatient to engage in
such enterprises, in proportion as their imaginations have been fired,
and their avarice excited, by the successes of those of their countrymen
who lately visited us.

The conversation next turned on conquests and conquerors; and the
Emperor observed that, to be a successful conqueror, it was necessary to
be ferocious, and that, if he had been such, he might have conquered the
world. I presumed to dissent from this opinion, which was doubtless
expressed in a moment of vexation. I represented that he, Napoleon, was
precisely a proof of the contrary; that he had not been ferocious, and
yet had conquered the world; and that, with the manners of modern times,
ferocity would certainly never have raised him to so high a point. I
added that, at the present day, terror could never subject us to the
control of an individual man; and that dominion was to be secured only
by good laws, joined to greatness of character, and that degree of
energy, which is proof against every trial, in him who is charged with
the execution of the laws. These, I affirmed, were precisely the causes
of Napoleon’s success, and of the submission and obedience of the people
over whom he ruled.

The Convention was ferocious, and inspired terror: it was submitted to,
but could not be endured. Had the power been vested in an individual,
his overthrow would soon have been accomplished. But the Convention was
a hydra, yet how many attempts were hazarded for its destruction!—how
many dangers did it escape as if by miracle! It was reduced to the
necessity of burying itself amidst its triumphs.

For a conqueror to be ferocious, with success, he must of necessity
command troops who are themselves ferocious, and he must wield dominion
over unenlightened people. In this respect Russia possesses an immense
superiority over the rest of Europe. She has the rare advantage of
possessing a civilized government, and barbarous subjects. There,
information directs and commands, while ignorance executes and destroys.
A Turkish Sultan could not long govern any enlightened European nation;
the empire of knowledge would be too strong for his power.

Speaking on another subject, the Emperor observed that, if the French
people had less energy than the Romans, they at least evinced greater
decorum. We should not have killed ourselves, as the Romans did under
the first Emperors; but at the same time we should have afforded no
examples of the turpitude and servility that marked the later periods of
the Roman empire. “Even in our most corrupt days,” said he, “our
baseness was not without certain restrictions: courtiers, whom the
sovereign could have prevailed on to do any thing in his own palace,
would have refused to bend the knee to him at his levee.”

I have already mentioned that we had with us scarcely any document
relative to French affairs during the Emperor’s time. The books that had
been brought among his effects were merely a few classics which he
carried about with him in all his campaigns. I received from Major
Hudson, resident in the island, a political compendium from 1793 to
1807, entitled “The Annual Register,” which contains the succession of
political events during each year, together with some of the most
important official documents. In our destitute circumstances this was a
valuable acquisition.


                IDEAS.—PLANS.—POLITICAL SUGGESTIONS, &C.

7th.—The Emperor breakfasted alone, and was engaged during the day in
dictating to the Grand Marshal and M. de Montholon.

In the evening, as the Emperor and I were walking together in the lower
path, which had now become the favourite resort, I informed him that a
person of consequence, whose ideas and statements might become the
channel of mediation between ourselves and the ruling world, and
influence our future destiny, had, with sufficiently significant forms
and preambles, invited us to tell him conscientiously what we believed
to be the Emperor’s notions on certain political subjects:—whether he
had granted his last constitution with the intention of maintaining
it;—whether he had sincerely abandoned his former plans as to the great
empire;—whether he would consent to leave England in the enjoyment of
her maritime supremacy, without envying her the tranquil possession of
India;—whether he would be willing to renounce the Colonies, and to
purchase colonial goods from the English alone, at the regular market
price;—whether he would not form an alliance with the Americans, in case
of their rupture with England;—whether he would consent to the existence
of a great kingdom in Germany, for that branch of the English royal
family which must immediately forfeit the throne of Great Britain on the
accession of the Princess Charlotte of Wales, or, in default of Germany,
whether he would consent to the establishment of that dominion in
Portugal, in case England should conclude arrangements to that effect
with the Court of Brazil.

These questions did not rest on vague ideas or idle opinions: the
individual supported them on positive facts. “We want,” said he, “a long
and lasting peace on the Continent—we want the tranquil enjoyment of our
present advantages, to help us out of the critical circumstances in
which we are now involved, and to relieve us from the enormous debt with
which we are burthened. The present state of France and of Europe,”
added he, “cannot bring about these results. The victory of Waterloo has
ruined you; but it was far from saving us; every sensible man in
England, every one who escapes the momentary influence of passion,
either does think, or will think, as I do.”

The Emperor doubted a part of this statement, and treated the rest as a
reverie; then, changing his tone, he said to me, “Well, what is your
opinion? Come, sir, you are now in the Council of State.”—“Sire,” I
replied, “people often indulge in reveries on the most serious subjects;
and our being imprisoned at St. Helena does not hinder us from composing
romances. Here then is one. Why not form a political marriage between
the two nations, in which the one would bring the army as a dowry: and
the other the navy? This will doubtless appear an absurd idea in the
eyes of the vulgar, and will perhaps be thought too bold by
well-informed people, because it is entirely novel and out of the usual
routine. But it is one of those unforeseen, luminous and useful
creations of plans which characterize your Majesty. You alone can cause
it to be listened to, and carry it into effect.”

Going even beyond the ideas of our English interlocutor, I said, “Would
not your Majesty give to-morrow, if you could, the whole French navy to
purchase Belgium and the bank of the Rhine? Would you not give one
hundred and fifty millions to purchase tens of thousands of millions?
Besides, such a bargain would procure to both nations at once the object
for which they have been wrangling and fighting for so many years; it
would reduce both countries to the necessity of mutually assisting each
other, instead of maintaining perpetual enmity. Would it be nothing for
France that her merchants in the English colonies should henceforward be
on the footing of Englishmen; and thus secure, without striking a blow,
the enjoyment of the trade of the whole world? Would it not be every
thing for England, on the other hand, for the sake of insuring to
herself the sovereignty of the ocean, the universality of trade (for
obtaining and preserving which she has incurred so many risks), to
attach France to a system by which the latter would become the regulator
and arbitrator of the Continent?

“Henceforth secure from danger, and strengthened by all the power of her
ally, England might disband her army, in return for the sacrifice which
France would make of her navy. She might even reduce considerably the
number of her ships. She would thus pay her debt, relieve her people,
and prosper; and, far from envying France, she would (the system being
once fairly understood, and passion having given place to real
interests) herself labour for the Continental aggrandizement of her
neighbour; for France would then be merely the advance-guard, while
England would be the resource and the reserve. Unity of legislation
between the two nations, their common interests, results so visibly
advantageous, would make amends for all the obstacles and difficulties
which the passions of rulers might oppose to the fulfilment of this
plan.”

The Emperor heard me, but made no reply: it is seldom that one can
ascertain his private opinions, and he rarely enters into political
conversations. Lest I should not have expressed myself with sufficient
clearness, I requested that he would permit me to unfold my ideas in
writing. He consented, and said no more. It was now very late, and he
retired to rest.

8th.—The Emperor dictated in the garden to Messrs. Montholon and
Gourgaud, and then walked on his favourite path. He was fatigued and
indisposed. He observed some females about to advance on the path, and
to throw themselves awkwardly in his way, for the sake of being
introduced to him; this annoyed him, and he turned away to avoid meeting
them.

I suggested that riding on horseback might be beneficial to him; we had
three horses at our disposal. The Emperor replied that he never could
reconcile himself to the idea of having an English officer constantly at
his side; that he decidedly renounced riding on such conditions; adding,
that every thing in life must be reduced to calculation, and that, if
the vexation arising from the sight of his jailor were greater than the
advantage he might derive from riding, it was of course advisable to
renounce the recreation altogether.

The Emperor ate but little dinner. During the dessert he amused himself
in examining the paintings on some plates of very beautiful Sevres
porcelain. They were masterpieces in their kind, and were worth thirty
Napoleons each. The paintings represented views or objects of antiquity
in Egypt.

The Emperor closed the day with a walk on his favourite path. He
remarked that he had been very dull all day. After several broken
conversations, he looked at his watch, and was very glad to find it was
half-past ten.

The weather was delicious, and the Emperor insensibly recovered his
usual spirits. He complained of his constitution, which, though
vigorous, occasionally exposed him to fits of indisposition. He,
however, consoled himself with the thought that if, in imitation of the
ancients, he should ever feel inclined to escape from the disgusts and
vexations of life, his moral opinions were not of a nature to prevent
him. He said that sometimes he could not reflect without horror on the
many years he might still have to live, and on the inutility of a
protracted old age; and that, if he were convinced France was happy and
tranquil, and not needing his aid, he should have lived long enough.

We ascended to the pavilion, it was past midnight, and we thought we had
gained a signal victory over time.

9th.—I called on Mr. Balcombe very early, to deliver to him my letters
for Europe, as a vessel was on the point of sailing. At Mr. Balcombe’s
house I met the officer who had been appointed as our guard. Struck with
the dejection which I had observed in the Emperor the day before, and
convinced of the necessity of his taking exercise, I told the officer
that I suspected the reason which prevented the Emperor from riding on
horseback; I added, that I would speak to him the more candidly and
openly, since I had noticed the very delicate way in which he discharged
his duty. I inquired what were his instructions, and whether it would be
necessary to observe them literally, in case the Emperor merely took a
ride round the house; adverting to the repugnance which he must
naturally feel for arrangements that were calculated every moment to
revive the recollection of the situation in which he was placed. I
assured the officer that no reflections were intended to be cast on him
personally, and that I was convinced, when the Emperor wished to take
long rides, he would prefer having him to accompany him. The officer
replied that his instructions were to follow the Emperor; but that, as
he made it a rule not to do any thing that might be offensive to him, he
would take upon himself not to accompany him.

At breakfast I communicated to the Emperor the conversation I had had
with the Captain. He replied that it was all well meant on the Captain’s
part; but that _he_ should not avail himself of the indulgence, as it
was not conformable with his sentiments to enjoy an advantage which
might be the means of compromising an officer.

This determination was very fortunate. When I went to Mr. Balcombe’s in
the evening, the Captain took me aside to inform me that he had been to
the town, in the course of the day, to speak with the Admiral respecting
our morning’s conversation, and that he had been enjoined to abide by
his instructions. I could not refrain from replying, somewhat sharply,
that I was certain the Emperor would immediately send back the three
horses that had been assigned for his use. The officer, to whom I had
also communicated the reply which the Emperor had given me in the
morning relative to him, observed that it would be very right to send
back the horses, and that he thought nothing better could be done. This
remark appeared to me to be prompted by the mortification he himself
experienced at the part that was imposed on him.

When we left Mr. Balcombe’s, the Emperor walked up and down the path in
the garden. I mentioned to him what I had heard from the English
officer. He seemed to expect it. I was not deceived in my conjecture; he
ordered me to send away the horses. This vexed me exceedingly; and I
said, perhaps rather sharply, that with his leave I would go and fulfil
his orders immediately. On which he replied, with great gravity and in a
very peculiar tone of voice:—“No, Sir, you are now out of temper. It
rarely happens that any thing is done well under such circumstances; it
is always best to let the night pass over after the offence of the day.”

We continued our walk till nearly midnight: the weather was delightful.

10th.—To-day, when our usual task was ended, the Emperor strolled out in
a new direction. He proceeded towards the town, until he came within
sight of the road and the shipping. As he was returning, he met Mrs.
Balcombe, and a Mrs. Stuart, a very pretty woman about twenty years of
age, who was returning from Bombay to England. The Emperor conversed
with her respecting the manners and customs of India, and the
inconveniencies of a sea-voyage, particularly for females. He also spoke
of Scotland, which was Mrs. Stuart’s native country; said a great deal
about Ossian, and complimented the lady on the climate of India not
having spoiled her clear Scottish complexion.

At this moment some slaves, carrying heavy boxes, passed by us on the
road; Mrs. Balcombe desired them, in rather an angry tone, to keep back;
but the Emperor interfered, saying, “Respect the burden, Madam!” At
these words, Mrs. Stuart, who had been attentively observing the
Emperor’s features, said, in a low tone of voice, to her friend:
“Heavens! what a countenance, and what a character! How different from
what I had been led to expect!”

MIDNIGHT CONVERSATIONS BY MOONLIGHT.—THE TWO EMPRESSES.—MARIA LOUISA’S
  MARRIAGE.—HER HOUSEHOLD.—THE DUCHESS DE MONTEBELLO.—MADAME DE
  MONTESQUIOU.—THE INSTITUTE OF MEUDON.— SENTIMENTS OF THE HOUSE OF
  AUSTRIA, WITH REGARD TO NAPOLEON.—ANECDOTES COLLECTED IN GERMANY,
  SINCE MY RETURN TO EUROPE.

11th—13th. We led a most regular life at Briars. Every day, after
dictating to me, the Emperor walked out between three and four o’clock.
He descended to the garden, where he walked up and down, and dictated to
one of the gentlemen who came from the town for that purpose, and who
wrote in the little arbour. About half-past five o’clock, he passed Mr.
Balcombe’s house, and went into the lower walk, to which he became every
day more and more attached. At this time the family were at dinner, and
he could enjoy his promenade without interruption. I joined the Emperor
here, and he continued his walk until dinner was announced.

After dinner the Emperor again returned to the garden, where he
sometimes had his coffee brought to him. My son then visited Mr.
Balcombe’s family, and the Emperor and I walked up and down. We
frequently remained in the garden until the night was far advanced and
the moon rose to light us. In the mildness and serenity of the night we
forgot the burning heat of the day. The Emperor never was more
talkative, nor seemed more perfectly to forget his cares, than during
these moonlight walks. In the familiarity of the conversations which I
thus enjoyed with him, he took pleasure in relating anecdotes of his
boyhood, in describing the sentiments and illusions which diffused a
charm over the early years of his youth, and in detailing the
circumstances of his private life, since he had played so distinguished
a part on the great theatre of the world. I have elsewhere noted down
what I conceived myself at liberty to repeat. Sometimes he seemed to
think he had spoken too much at length, and had detailed things too
minutely. He would then say to me: “Come, it is your turn now: let me
have a little of your history; but you are not a tale-teller.” Indeed I
took especial care to be silent; I was too much afraid of losing a
syllable of what so deeply interested me.

In one of our nightly walks, the Emperor told me that he had, in the
course of his life, been attached to two women of very different
characters. The one was the votary of art and the graces; the other was
all innocence and simple nature; and each, he observed, had a very high
degree of merit.

The first, in no moment of her life ever assumed a position or attitude
that was not pleasing or captivating; it would have been impossible ever
to discover in her, or to experience from her, any thing unpleasant. She
employed every resource of art to heighten natural attractions; but with
such ingenuity as to render every trace of it imperceptible. The other,
on the contrary, never even suspected that any thing was to be gained by
innocent artifice. The one was always beside the truth, her first answer
was always in the negative; the other was altogether frank and open, and
was a stranger to subterfuge. The first never asked her husband for any
thing, but she was in debt to every one: the second freely asked
whenever she wanted, which, however, very seldom happened; and she never
thought of receiving any thing without immediately paying for it. Both
were amiable and gentle in disposition, and strongly attached to their
husband. But it must already have been guessed who they are; and those
who have ever seen them will not fail to recognise the two Empresses.

The Emperor declared that he had uniformly experienced from both the
greatest equality of temper and most implicit obedience.

The marriage of Maria-Louisa was consummated at Fontainebleau,
immediately after her arrival. The Emperor, setting aside all the
etiquette that had previously been arranged, went to meet her, and, in
disguise, got into her carriage. She was agreeably surprised when she
discovered him. She had always been given to understand that Berthier,
who had married her by proxy at Vienna, in person and age exactly
resembled the Emperor: she, however, signified that she observed a very
pleasing difference between them.

The Emperor wished to spare her all the details of domestic etiquette,
customary on such occasions: she had, however, received careful
instructions on the subject at Vienna. The Emperor inquired what
directions she had received from her illustrious relatives with regard
to him personally. To be entirely devoted to him, and to obey him in all
things, was the reply. This declaration, and not the decisions of
certain cardinals and bishops, as was reported, proved the solution of
all the Emperor’s scruples of conscience. Besides, Henry IV. acted in
the same way on a similar occasion.

Maria-Louisa’s marriage, said the Emperor, was proposed and concluded
under the same forms and conditions as that of Marie-Antoinette, whose
contract was adopted as a model. After the separation from Josephine,
negotiations were entered into with the Emperor of Russia, for the
purpose of soliciting the hand of one of his sisters: the difficulties
rested merely on the settling of certain points relative to religion.
Prince Eugene, conversing with M. de Schwartzenberg, learned that the
Emperor of Austria would not object to an union between Napoleon and his
daughter; and this information was communicated to the Emperor. A
council was convoked to decide whether an alliance with Russia or
Austria would be most advantageous. Eugene and Talleyrand were for the
Austrian alliance, and Cambaceres against it. The majority were in
favour of an Archduchess. Eugene was appointed to make the official
overture, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs was empowered to sign it
that very day if an opportunity should present itself; which proved to
be the case.

Russia took umbrage at this; she thought herself trifled with, though
without just ground. Nothing of an obligatory nature had yet transpired;
both parties remained perfectly free. Political interests predominated
over every thing.

The Emperor appointed the Duchess de Montebello to be lady of honour to
Maria-Louisa; the Count de Beauharnais to be her gentleman of honour,
and the Prince Aldobrandini to be her equerry. In the misfortunes of
1814, these individuals, said the Emperor, did not evince the
devotedness which the Empress was entitled to expect from them. Her
equerry deserted her without taking his leave; her gentleman of honour
refused to follow her; and her lady of honour, notwithstanding the
attachment which the Empress entertained for her, thought she had
completely fulfilled her duty in attending her mistress as far as
Vienna.

The appointment of the Duchess de Montebello to the post of lady of
honour was one of those happy selections which, at the time it was made,
excited universal approbation. The Duchess was a young and beautiful
woman, of irreproachable character, and the widow of a marshal, called
the _Orlando_ of the army, who had recently fallen on the field of
battle. This choice was very agreeable to the army, and encouraged the
national party, who were alarmed at the marriage and the number and rank
of the chamberlains who were appointed. This retinue was, by many,
looked upon as a step towards the counter-revolution; and endeavours
were made to represent it as such. As for the Emperor, he had acted in
ignorance of the character of Maria-Louisa, and had been principally
influenced by the fear that she would be filled with prejudices
respecting birth, that might be offensive at the Court. When he came to
know her better, and found that she was wholly imbued with the
prevailing notions of the day, he regretted not having made another
choice. He conceived that he should have done better to select the
Countess de Beauveau, a woman of amiable, mild, and inoffensive manners,
who would have been influenced only by the family advice of her numerous
relatives, and who might thus have introduced a kind of useful custom,
and have occasioned the appointment of well-recommended inferiors. She
might also have rallied about the Court many persons who were at a
distance; and that without any inconvenience, because these arrangements
could only have been brought about by the sanction of the Emperor, who
was not the sort of man to allow himself to be abused.

The Empress conceived the tenderest affection for the Duchess de
Montebello. This lady had at one time a chance of being Queen of Spain.
Ferdinand VII. when at Valency, requested the Emperor’s permission to
marry Mademoiselle de Tascher, cousin-german of Josephine, and bearing
the same name, after the example of the Prince of Baden, who married
Mademoiselle de Beauharnais. The Emperor, who already contemplated a
separation from Josephine, refused his consent to the match, not wishing
by this connexion to add to the difficulties that already stood in the
way of his divorce. Ferdinand then solicited the hand of the Duchess de
Montebello, or of any other French lady whom the Emperor might think
proper to adopt. The Emperor subsequently gave Mademoiselle de Tascher
in marriage to the Duke d’Aremberg, whom he intended to create Governor
of the Netherlands; with the view of ultimately compensating Brussels
for the loss of the old Court. The Emperor moreover wished to appoint
the Count de Narbonne, who had taken part in the Empress’s marriage,
Gentleman of honour, in room of the Count de Beauharnais; but the
extreme aversion which Maria-Louisa evinced for this change deterred the
Emperor from carrying it into effect. The Empress’s dislike to the Count
de Narbonne was, however, only occasioned by the intrigues of the
individuals composing her household, who had nothing to fear from M. de
Beauharnais, but who very much dreaded the influence and talent of M. de
Narbonne.

The Emperor informed us that, when he had to make appointments to
difficult posts, he usually asked the persons about him to furnish him
with a list of candidates; and from these lists, and the information he
obtained, he privately deliberated on his choice. He mentioned several
individuals who were proposed as lady of honour to the Empress: they
were the Princess de Vaudemont, Madame de Rochefoucalt, afterwards
Madame de Castellanes, and some others. He then asked us to tell him
whom we should have proposed; which occasioned us to take a review of a
good part of the Court. One of us mentioned Madame de Montesquiou; upon
which the Emperor replied, “She would have done well, but she had a post
which suited her still better. She was a woman of singular merit; her
piety was sincere, and her principles excellent; she had the highest
claims on my esteem and regard. I wanted half a dozen like her; I would
have given them all appointments equal to their deserts, and wished for
more. She discharged her duties admirably when with my son at Vienna.”

The following anecdote will afford a correct idea of the manner in which
Madame de Montesquiou managed the King of Rome. The apartments of the
young Prince were on the ground floor, and looked out on the court, of
the Tuileries. At almost every hour in the day, numbers of people were
looking in at the window, in the hope of seeing him. One day when he was
in a violent fit of passion, and rebelling furiously against the
authority of Madame de Montesquiou, she immediately ordered all the
shutters to be closed. The child, surprised at the sudden darkness,
asked _Maman Quiou_, as he used to call her, what it all meant. “I love
you too well,” she replied, “not to hide your anger from the crowd in
the court-yard. You, perhaps, will one day be called to govern all those
people, and what would they say if they saw you in such a fit of rage?
Do you think they would ever obey you, if they knew you to be so
naughty?” Upon which, the child begged her pardon, and promised never
again to give way to such fits of anger.

“This,” observed the Emperor, “was language very different from that
addressed by M. de Villeroi to Louis XV. ‘_Behold all those people, my
Prince_,’ said he, ‘_they belong to you; all the men you see yonder are
yours_.’”

Madame de Montesquiou was adored by the young King of Rome. At the time
of her removal from Vienna it was found necessary to employ stratagems
to deceive the child: it was even feared that his health would suffer
from the separation.

The Emperor had conceived many novel ideas relative to the education of
the King of Rome. For this important object he decided on the _Institut
de Meudon_, of which he had already laid down the principle, with the
view of farther developing it at his leisure. There he proposed to
assemble the Princes of the Imperial house, particularly the sons of
those branches of the family who had been raised to foreign thrones.
This plan, he contended, would have combined the attentions of private
tuition with the advantages of public education. “These children,” said
the Emperor, “who were destined to occupy different thrones, and to
govern different nations, would thus have acquired conformity of
principles, manners, and ideas. The better to facilitate the
amalgamation and uniformity of the federative parts of the Empire, each
Prince was to bring with him from his own country ten or twelve youths
of about his own age, the sons of the first families in the state. What
an influence would they not have exercised on their return home! I
doubted not,” continued the Emperor, “but that Princes of other
dynasties, unconnected with my family, would soon have solicited, as a
great favour, permission to place their sons in the Institute of Meudon.
What advantages would thence have arisen to the nations composing the
European association! All these young Princes,” said he, “would have
been brought together early enough to be united in the tender and
powerful bonds of youthful friendship: and they would, at the same time,
have been separated early enough to obviate the fatal effects of rising
passions—the ardour of partiality—the ambition of success—the jealousy
of love.”

The Emperor wished that the education of the Princes should be founded
on general information, extended views, summaries, and results. He
wished them to possess knowledge rather than learning, judgment rather
than attainments; he preferred the application of details to the study
of theories. Above all, he objected to the pursuing of any particular
study too deeply, for he regarded perfection, or too great success in
certain things, whether in the arts or sciences, as a disadvantage to a
prince. A nation, he said, will never gain much by being governed by a
poet, a virtuoso, a naturalist, a chymist, a turner, a locksmith, &c.
&c.

Maria-Louisa confessed to the Emperor that, when her marriage with him
was first proposed, she could not help feeling a kind of terror, owing
to the accounts she had heard of Napoleon from the individuals of her
family. When she mentioned these reports to her uncles, the Archdukes,
who were very urgent for the marriage, they replied,—“That was all very
true, while he was our enemy: but the case is altered now.“

“To afford an idea of the sympathy and good will with which the
different members of the Austrian family were taught to regard me,” said
the Emperor, “it is sufficient to mention that one of the young
Archdukes frequently burned his dolls, which he called _roasting
Napoleon_. He afterwards declared he would not roast me any more, for he
loved me very much, because I had given his sister Louisa plenty of
money to buy him play-things.”

Since my return to Europe, I have had an opportunity of ascertaining the
sentiments entertained by the House of Austria towards Napoleon. In
Germany, a person of distinction informed me that having had a private
audience of the Emperor Francis, during his tour in Italy in 1816, the
conversation turned on Napoleon. Francis spoke of him in the most
respectful terms. One might almost have supposed, said my informant,
that he still regarded him as the ruler of France, and that he was
ignorant of his captivity at St. Helena. He never alluded to him by any
other title than the Emperor Napoleon.

I learned from the same individual that the Archduke John, when in
Italy, visited a rotunda, on the ceiling of which was painted a
celebrated action of which Napoleon was the hero. As he raised his head
to look at the painting, his hat fell off, and one of his attendants
stooped to pick it up. “Let it be,” said he; “it is thus that the man
who is there portrayed should be contemplated.”

Now that I am on this subject, I will note down a few particulars which
I collected in Germany since my return to Europe; and to mark the degree
of credit to which they are entitled, I may mention that I obtained them
from individuals holding high diplomatic posts. Every one knows that
these members of diplomatic corps form among themselves a sort of
family, a kind of free-masonry, and that their sources of information
are of the most authentic kind.

The Empress Maria-Louisa complained that, when she quitted France, M. de
Talleyrand reserved to himself the honour of demanding from her the
restitution of the Crown jewels, and ascertaining whether they had been
restored with the most scrupulous exactness.

In 1814, during the disasters of France, many tempting and brilliant
proposals were made to Prince Eugene. An Austrian General offered him
the crown of Italy, in the name of the Allies, on condition of his
joining them. This offer afterwards came from a still higher quarter,
and was several times repeated. During the reign of the Emperor there
had been some idea of raising the Prince to a throne; and those of
Portugal, Naples, and Poland, were thought of.

In 1815, men of high influence in European diplomacy endeavoured to
sound his opinions, with the view of ascertaining whether, in case
Napoleon should again be constrained to abdicate, and the choice should
fall on him, he would accept the Crown. On this occasion, as on every
other, the Prince steadily pursued a line of duty and honour which will
immortalize him. _Honour and fidelity_ was his constant reply; and
posterity will make it his device.

On the distribution of States in 1814, the Emperor Alexander, who
frequently visited the Empress Josephine at Malmaison, signified a wish
to procure for her son the sovereignty of Genoa. She, however, declined
this proposition, at the instigation of one of the ruling diplomatists,
who falsely flattered her with the hope of something better.

At the Congress of Vienna, the Emperor Alexander, who honoured Prince
Eugene with particular marks of favour, insisted that he should be made
the Sovereign of at least three hundred thousand subjects. He testified
the sincerest friendship for him, and they were every day seen walking
about together arm-in-arm. The landing at Cannes put an end, if not to
the sentiment, at least to the manifestation of it; and changed the
political interests of the Emperor of Russia.—The Austrian government
even entertained the idea of seizing the person of Prince Eugene, and
sending him a prisoner to a fortress in Hungary; but the King of
Bavaria, his father-in-law, indignantly represented to the Emperor of
Austria that Eugene had gone to Vienna under his protection and
guarantee, and that they should not be violated. Thus Eugene remained
free on his own private parole and that of the King his father-in-law.

So lately as 1814, gold twenty and forty-franc pieces were struck at
Milan with the head of Napoleon and the date of 1814. Either from
motives of economy or some other cause, no new die had yet been
engraved.

After the fall of Napoleon, Alexander on several occasions manifested a
marked and decided dislike to him. In 1815 he was the promoter of the
second crusade against Napoleon; he directed every hostile measure with
the utmost degree of animosity, and seemed to make it almost a personal
affair; alleging, as the cause of his aversion, that he had been
deceived and trifled with. If this tardy resentment was not a mere
pretence, there is every reason to believe that it was stirred up by an
old confidant of Napoleon’s, who, in private conversations, had artfully
wounded the vanity of Alexander, by statements, true or false, of the
private opinion of Napoleon with regard to his illustrious friend.

In 1814 there appeared reason to believe that Alexander would not be
averse to see young Napoleon placed on the throne of France. After the
Emperor’s second abdication, he seemed far less favourably disposed to
the continuance of Napoleon’s dynasty.

In the second crusade, the Emperor Alexander marched at the head of
innumerable forces. He was heard to declare, at that period, that the
war might last for three years; but that Napoleon would nevertheless be
subdued in the end.

On the first intelligence of the battle of Fleurus, the chiefs of all
the Russian columns immediately received orders to halt; while all the
Austrian and Bavarian corps instantly turned off, with the view of
detaching themselves and forming a separate force. Had the Congress of
Vienna been broken up on the 20th of March, it is almost certain that
the crusade would not have been renewed; and had Napoleon been
victorious at Waterloo, it is also tolerably certain that the crusade
would have been dissolved.

The news of Napoleon’s landing at Cannes was a thunderbolt to the French
plenipotentiary at Vienna. He indeed drew up the famous declaration of
the 13th of March; and, virulent as it is, the first draft was still
more so: it was amended by other ministers. The countenance of this
plenipotentiary, as he gradually learned the advance of Napoleon, was a
sort of thermometer, which excited the laughter of all the members of
the Congress.

Austria soon knew the real state of affairs: her couriers informed her
admirably well of all that was passing. The members of the French
Legation alone were involved in doubt: they were still circulating a
magnanimous letter from the King to the other Sovereigns, informing them
that he was resolved to die at the Tuileries, when it was already known
that Louis had left the capital, and was on his way to the frontier.

A member of the Congress and Lord Wellington, in a confidential
conversation with the members of the French Legation, with the map in
their hands, assigned the 20th or the 21st for Napoleon’s entry into
Paris.

As the Emperor Francis received the official publications from Grenoble
and Lyons, he regularly forwarded them to Schöenbrunn, to Maria Louisa,
to whom they afforded extreme joy. It is very true that, at a somewhat
later period, an idea was entertained of seizing young Napoleon, in
order to convey him to France.

The French Plenipotentiary at length quitted Vienna, and proceeded to
Frankfort and Wisbaden, whence he could more conveniently negotiate
either with Ghent or Paris. Never was a time-serving courier thrown into
greater embarrassment and anxiety. The ardour with which he had been
inspired, on receiving the intelligence of Napoleon’s landing at Cannes,
was very much abated when he heard of the Emperor’s arrival at Paris;
and he entered into an understanding with Fouché that the latter should
be his guarantee with Napoleon, pledging himself, on the other hand, to
be Fouché’s guarantee with the Bourbons. There is good ground for
believing that the offers made by this Plenipotentiary to the new
Sovereign went very great lengths indeed; but Napoleon indignantly
rejected them, lest, as he said, he should degrade his policy too far.

In 1814, before M. de Talleyrand declared himself for the Bourbons, he
was for the Regency; in which, however, he himself wished to play the
principal part. Events fatal to the Napoleon dynasty prevented this
moment of uncertainty from being turned to good account. Every thing
tends to prove that the result which was at that period adopted was far
from being agreeable to the intentions of Austria; that power was duped,
betrayed, or at least carried by assault.

The fatality attending the military movements was such that the Allies
entered Paris without the concurrence of the Austrian Cabinet.
Alexander’s famous declaration against Napoleon Buonaparte and his
family was also made without the Austrian Power being consulted; and the
Count d’Artois only entered France by contriving to slip in secretly in
spite of the orders at the Austrian head-quarters, where he had been
refused passports.

It appears that Austria, on the retreat from Moscow, exerted sincere
efforts in London for negotiating a peace with Napoleon; but the
influence of the Russian Cabinet was all-powerful in London, and no
proposals for peace were listened to. The armistice of Dresden then
arrived, and Austria declared for war.

During this interval, the Austrian minister in London could never obtain
a hearing. He however remained for a considerable time in the English
capital, and did not leave it until the Allies had reached the heart of
France, and Lord Castlereagh hinted at the possibility, for a moment,
that the heroic success of Napoleon might render negotiations
indispensable.

If this minister had not previously been sent to London, he would have
been destined for Paris; and there probably his influence might have
brought about a turn of negotiations different from those which arose
during his absence between the Tuileries and Vienna.

In the height of the crisis he found himself detained in England as if
by force. In his impatience to reach the grand centre of negotiations,
he quitted his post, and proceeded to Holland, braving a violent
tempest. No sooner had he arrived on the theatre of events than he fell
into the hands of Napoleon at Saint-Dizier; but the fate of France was
then decided, though the fact was not yet known at the French
head-quarters. Alexander was entering Paris.

The Austrian minister in London exerted every endeavour to procure a
passport to enable him to join his Sovereign by passing through Calais
and Paris; but in vain. This circumstance; whether accidental, or
premeditated, was another fatality. But for this disappointment, the
Austrian minister would have reached Paris before the Allies, would have
joined Maria-Louisa, would have defeated the last projects of M. de
Talleyrand, and would have altogether produced new combinations.

Opinion was divided in the Austrian Cabinet. One party was for the union
with France; the other was for the alliance with Russia. Intrigue or
chance decided in favour of Russia, and Austria, from that moment, was
merely led on.

14th.—The coffee that was served at our breakfast this morning was
better than usual; it was even good. The Emperor expressed himself
pleased with it. Some moments after he observed, placing his hand on his
stomach, that he felt the benefit of it. It would be difficult to
express what were my feelings on hearing this simple remark. The
Emperor, by thus appreciating so trivial an enjoyment, contrary to his
custom, unconsciously proved to me the effect of all the privations he
had suffered, but of which he never complained.

When we returned from our evening walk, the Emperor read to me a chapter
on the _Provisional Consuls_, which he had dictated to M. de Montholon.
Having finished reading, the Emperor took a piece of ribbon, and began
to tie together the loose sheets of paper. It was late; the silence of
night prevailed around us. My reflections were on that day of a
melancholy cast. I gazed on the Emperor. I looked on those hands which
had wielded so many sceptres, and which were now tranquilly, and
perhaps, not without some degree of pleasure, occupied in the humble
task of tying together a few sheets of paper. On these sheets, indeed,
were traced events that will never be forgotten; portraits that will
decide the judgment of posterity. It is the book of life or death to
many whose names are recorded in it. These were the reflections that
passed in my mind. “And the Emperor,” thought I, “reads to me what he
writes; he familiarly converses with me, asks my opinion, and I freely
give it. After all, I am not to be pitied in my exile at St. Helena.”

15th.—Immediately after dinner the Emperor walked in his favourite path.
He had his coffee carried down to him in the garden, and he drank it as
he walked about. The conversation turned on love. I must have made some
very fine and sentimental remarks on this important subject; for the
Emperor laughed at what he styled my prattle, and said that he
understood none of my romantic verbiage. Then speaking with an air of
levity, he wished to make me believe that he was better acquainted with
sensations than sentiments. I made free to remark that he was trying to
be thought worse than he was described to be in the authentic, but very
secret, accounts that were circulated about the palace. “And what was
said of me?” resumed he, with an air of gaiety. “Sire,” I replied, “it
is understood that, when in the summit of your power, you suffered
yourself to be bound in the chains of love; that you became a hero of
romance; that, fired by an unexpected resistance, you conceived an
attachment for a lady in private life; that you wrote her above a dozen
love-letters; and that her power over you prevailed so far as to compel
you to disguise yourself, and to visit her secretly and alone, at her
own residence, in the heart of Paris.”—”And how came this to be known?”
said he, smiling; which of course amounted to an admission of the fact.
“And it was doubtless added,” continued he, “that that was the most
imprudent act of my whole life; for, had my mistress proved treacherous,
what might not have been my fate—alone and disguised, in the
circumstances in which I was placed, amidst the snares with which I was
surrounded? But what more is said of me?”—“Sire, it is affirmed that
your Majesty’s posterity is not confined to the King of Rome. The secret
chronicle states that he has two elder brothers: one the offspring of a
fair foreigner, whom you loved in a distant country; the other, the
fruit of a connection nearer at hand, in the bosom of your own capital.
It was asserted that both had been conveyed to Malmaison, before our
departure; the one brought by his mother, and the other introduced by
his tutor; and they were described to be the living portraits of their
father.”[23]

Footnote 23:

  It is said, that a codicil in the Emperor’s will, which, however, must
  remain secret, completely confirms the above conjectures.

The Emperor laughed much at the extent of my information, as he termed
it; and being now in a merry vein, he began to take a frank retrospect
of his early years, relating many of the love-affairs and numerous
adventures in which he had been engaged. I omit the first; amongst the
second he mentioned a supper that took place in the neighbourhood of the
Saone at the commencement of the Revolution, and at which he had been
present in company with the faithful Desmazzis. He described the whole
with the utmost pleasantry.—He had got himself, he observed, into a
wasp’s nest, where his patriotic eloquence had to contend strenuously
against the contrary doctrines of the other guests, and had nearly
brought him into a serious scrape. “You and I,” he continued, “were at
that time very far from each other.”—”Not so very far, in point of
distance, Sire,” replied, “though certainly very remote with respect to
doctrines. At that time I was also in the neighbourhood of the Saone, on
one of the quays of Lyons, where crowds of patriots were declaiming
against the cannon which they had just discovered in some boats, and
which they termed a counter-revolution. I very inopportunely proposed
that they should make sure of the cannon, by administering to them the
_civic oath_. However, I narrowly escaped being hanged for my folly. You
see, Sire, that I might precisely at that moment have balanced your
account, had any disaster befallen you among your aristocrat
companions.” This was not the only curious coincidence that was
mentioned in the course of the evening. The Emperor, having related to
me an interesting circumstance that took place in 1788, said, “Where
were you at that time.”—“Sire,” replied I, after a few moments
recollection, “I was then at Martinique, supping every evening with the
future Empress Josephine.”

A shower of rain came on and we were obliged to retire from our
favourite path, which, the Emperor observed, we might probably at a
future period look back to with pleasure. “Perhaps so,” I replied; “but
certainly that will not be until we have forsaken it for ever. Meanwhile
we must content ourselves with naming it the Path of Philosophy, since
it cannot be called the Path of Lethe.”

THE FAUXBOURG SAINT-GERMAIN, &C.—THE EMPEROR’S FREEDOM FROM PREJUDICE
  AND ILL-WILL.—CHARACTERISTIC LANGUAGE.

16th.—To-day the Emperor put some questions to me relative to the
Fauxbourg Saint-Germain; that last bulwark of the old aristocracy, that
refuge of old-fashioned prejudices; the _Germanic League_, as he called
it. I told him that, before his last misfortune, his power had extended
into every part of it: it had been invaded, and its name alone remained;
it had been shaken and vanquished by glory; and the victories of
Austerlitz and Jena, and the triumph of Tilsit, had achieved its
conquest. The younger portion of the inhabitants, and all who had
generous hearts, could not be insensible to the glory of their country.
The Emperor’s marriage with Maria-Louisa gave it the last blow. The few
malcontents who remained were either those whose ambition had not been
gratified, and who are to be found in all classes, or some obstinate old
men, and silly old women, bewailing their past influence. All reasonable
and sensible persons had yielded to the superior talents of the Head of
the State, and endeavoured to console themselves for their losses in the
hope of a better prospect for their children. This became the point
towards which all their ideas were directed. They gave the Emperor
credit for his partiality to old family names; they agreed that any one
else in his place would have annihilated them. They prized very highly
the confidence with which the Emperor had collected individuals of
ancient family about his person; and they valued him no less for the
language he had made use of in making choice of their children to serve
in the army:—“These names belong to France and to History; I am the
guardian of their glory, I will not allow them to perish.” These and
other such expressions had gained him numbers of proselytes. The Emperor
here expressed his apprehension that sufficient favour had not been
shewn to this party. “My system of amalgamation,” said he, “required it:
I wished and even directed favours to be conferred on them: but the
ministers, who were the great mediators, never properly fulfilled my
real intentions in that respect; either because they had not sufficient
foresight, or because they feared that they might thus create rivals for
favour, and diminish their own chances. M. Talleyrand, in particular,
always shewed great opposition to such a measure, and always resisted my
favourable intuitions towards the old nobility.” I observed, however,
that the greater part of those whom he had placed near him had soon
shewn themselves attached to his person; that they had served him
conscientiously, and had, generally speaking, remained faithful to him
at the critical moment. The Emperor did not deny it, and even went so
far as to say that the twofold event of the King’s return and his own
abdication must naturally have had great influence on certain doctrines;
and that, for his own part, he could see a great difference between the
same conduct pursued in 1814 and in 1815.

And here I must observe that, since I have become acquainted with the
Emperor’s character, I have never known him to evince, for a single
moment, the least feeling of anger or animosity against those
individuals who had been most to blame in their conduct towards him. He
gives no great credit to those who distinguished themselves by their
good conduct: they had only done their duty. He is not very indignant
against those who acted basely; he partly saw through their characters:
they yielded to the impulses of their nature. He speaks of them coolly,
and without animosity; attributing their conduct in some measure to
existing circumstances, which he acknowledged were of a very perplexing
nature, and placing the rest to the account of human weakness. Vanity
was the ruin of Marmont: “Posterity will justly cast a shade upon his
character,” said he; “yet his heart will be more valued than the memory
of his career. The conduct of Augereau was the result of his want of
information, and the baseness of those who surrounded him; that of
Berthier, of his want of spirit, and his absolute nullity of character.”

I remarked that the latter had let slip the best and easiest opportunity
of rendering himself for ever illustrious, by frankly making his
submission to the King, and intreating his Majesty’s permission to
withdraw from the world, and mourn in solitude the fate of him who had
honoured him with the title of his companion in arms, and had called him
his friend. “Yes,” said the Emperor; “even this step, simple as it was,
was beyond his power.”—“His talents, his understanding,” said I, “had
always been a subject of doubt with us. Your Majesty’s choice, your
confidence, your great attachment, surprised us exceedingly.”—“To say
the truth,” replied the Emperor, “Berthier was not without talent, and I
am far from wishing to disavow his merit, or my partiality for him; but
his talent and merit were special and technical; beyond a limited point
he had no mind whatever: and then he was so undecided.”—I observed that
“he was, notwithstanding, full of pretensions and pride in his conduct
towards us.”—“Do you think, then, that the title of Favourite goes for
nothing?” said the Emperor. I added, that “he was very harsh and
overbearing.” “And what,” said he, “my dear Las Cases, is more
overbearing than weakness which feels itself protected by strength? Look
at women, for example.”

Berthier accompanied the Emperor in his carriage during his campaigns.
As they drove along, the Emperor would examine the order-book and the
report of the positions, whence he formed his resolutions, adopted his
plans, and arranged the necessary movements. Berthier noted down his
directions, and at the first station they came to, or during the first
moments allotted to rest, whether by night or by day, he made out, in
his turn, all the orders and individual details with admirable
regularity, precision, and despatch. This was a kind of duty at which he
shewed himself always ready and indefatigable. “This was the special
merit of Berthier,” said the Emperor: “it was most valuable to me; no
other talent could have made up for the want of it.”

I now return to notice some characteristic traits of the Emperor. He
invariably speaks with perfect coolness, without passion, without
prejudice, and without resentment, of the events and the persons
connected with his life. It is evident that he would be capable of
becoming the ally of his most cruel enemy, and of living with the man
who had done him the greatest wrong. He speaks of his past history as if
it had occurred three centuries ago: in his recitals and his
observations he speaks the language of past ages: he is like a spirit
discoursing in the Elysian fields; his conversations are true Dialogues
of the Dead. He speaks of himself as of a third person; noticing the
Emperor’s actions, pointing out the faults with which history may
reproach him, and analysing the reasons and the motives which might be
alleged in his justification.

He never can excuse himself, he says, by throwing blame on others, since
he never followed any but his own decision. He may complain, at the
worst, of false information, but never of bad counsel. He had surrounded
himself with the best possible advisers, but he had always adhered to
his own opinion, and he was far from repenting of having done so. “It
is,” said he, “the indecision and anarchy of agents which produce
anarchy and feebleness in results. In order to form a just opinion
respecting the faults produced by the sole personal decision of the
Emperor, it will be necessary to throw into the scale the great actions
which he would have been prevented from performing, and the other faults
which he would have been induced to commit, by those very counsels which
he is blamed for not having followed.”

In viewing the complicated circumstances of his fall, looks upon things
so much in a mass, and from so high a point, that individuals escape his
notice. He never evinces the least symptom of virulence towards those of
whom it might be supposed he has the greatest reason to complain. His
greatest mark of reprobation, and I have had frequent occasion to notice
it, is to preserve silence with respect to them, whenever they are
mentioned in his presence. But how often has he not been heard to
restrain the violent and less reserved expressions of those about him?
“You are not acquainted with men,” he has said to us; “they are
difficult to comprehend, if one wishes to be strictly just. Can they
understand or explain even their own characters? Almost all those who
abandoned me would, had I continued to be prosperous, never, perhaps
have dreamed of their own defection. There are vices and virtues which
depend on circumstances. Our last trials were beyond all human strength!
Besides I was forsaken rather than betrayed; there was more of weakness
than of perfidy around me. It was the _denial of St. Peter_: tears and
repentance are probably at hand. And where will you find, in the page of
history, any one possessing a greater number of friends and partisans?
Who was ever more popular and more beloved? Who was ever more ardently
and deeply regretted? Here, from this very rock, on viewing the present
disorders in France, who would not be tempted to say that I still reign
there? The Kings and princes, my allies, have remained faithful to me to
the last, they were carried away by the people in a mass: and those who
were around me, found themselves enveloped and overwhelmed by an
irresistible whirlwind.... No! human nature might have appeared in a
light still more odious, and I might have had still greater cause of
complaint!”

             ON THE OFFICERS OF THE EMPEROR’S HOUSEHOLD IN
                   1814.—PLAN OF ADDRESS TO THE KING.

17th.—The Emperor asked me some questions to-day relative to the
officers of his household. With the exception of two or three, at the
most, who had drawn upon themselves the contempt of the very party to
which they had gone over, nothing could be said against them: the
majority had even evinced an ardent devotion to the Emperor’s interests.
The Emperor then made enquiries respecting some of these individuals in
particular, calling them by their names; and I could not but express my
approbation of them all. “What do you tell me?” said he, interrupting me
hastily while I was speaking of one of them; “and yet I gave him so bad
a reception at the Tuileries on my return! Ah! I fear I have committed
some involuntary acts of injustice! This comes of being obliged to take
for granted the first story that is told, and of not having a single
moment to spare for verification! I fear too that I have left many debts
of gratitude in arrear! How unfortunate it is to be incapable of doing
every thing one’s self!”

I replied—“Sire, it is true that, if blame be attached to the officers
of your household, it must be shared equally by all; a fact, however,
which must humble us strangely in the eyes of foreign nations. As soon
as the King appeared, all hastened to him, not as to the sovereign whom
your abdication had left us, but as to one who had never ceased to be
our sovereign; not with the dignity of men proud of having always
fulfilled their duties, but with the equivocal embarrassment of
unskilful courtiers. Each sought only to justify himself: your Majesty
was from that instant disavowed and abjured; the title of Emperor was
dropped. The Ministers, the Nobles, the intimate friends of your
Majesty, styled you simply '_Buonaparte_,’ and blushed not for
themselves or their nation. They excused themselves by saying that they
had been compelled to serve; that they could not do otherwise, through
dread of the treatment they might have experienced.” The Emperor here
recognised a true picture of our national character. He said we were
still the same people as our ancestors the Gauls: that we still retained
the same levity, the same inconstancy, and, above all, the same vanity.
“When shall we,” said he, “exchange this vanity for a little pride?”

“The officers of your Majesty’s household,” said I, “neglected a noble
opportunity of acquiring both honour and popularity. There were above
one hundred and fifty officers of the household; a great number of them
belonged to the first families, and were men of independent fortune. It
was for them to set an example, which, being followed by others, might
have given another impulse to the national attitude, and afforded us a
claim on public esteem.”[24]—“Yes,” said the Emperor, “if all the upper
classes had acted in that way, affairs might have turned out very
differently. The old editors of the public journals would not then have
indulged in their chimeras of the good old times; we should not then
have been annoyed with their dissertations on the straight line and the
curve line; the King would have adhered honestly to his charter; I
should never have dreamed of quitting the Island of Elba; the head of
the nation would have been recorded in history with greater honour and
dignity; and we should all have been gainers.”

Footnote 24:

  In this spirit, and in imitation of the example of other bodies, a
  plan of Address to the King was drawn up in the name of the Officers
  of the Emperor’s Household. It was in substance as follows:—

  “Sire—The undersigned, who formed a part of the household of the
  Emperor Napoleon, solicit from your Majesty the favour of particular
  attention.

  “Heirs to the duties of their fathers, they were, at a former period,
  faithful defenders of the throne; many of them followed your Majesty
  through long years of exile, into a foreign land, and sealed their
  devotedness by the forfeiture of their patrimony.

  “It was precisely these well-known principles, and this acknowledged
  conduct, which constituted their claim, and called attention to them,
  when it was in contemplation to raise up a new throne and to surround
  it with adherents.

  “The expectations of him who rallied us around him were not, could not
  be, disappointed: we fulfilled our new duties with _honour and
  fidelity_. These sentiments, Sire, the surest pledges of every other,
  would be sufficient to secure our own esteem, if it were possible for
  us to remain in indolent retirement. But what good and loyal Frenchman
  would desire a state of absolute repose? And yet, should any of us
  feel ourselves, through motives of delicacy, reduced to await, in
  silence, our appointment to new duties, might not our motive be
  misconstrued? On the other hand, might not the feelings of those also
  be misunderstood who, yielding to the impulse of their hearts, eagerly
  hastened to receive the favours of your Majesty?

  “Such, Sire, is the peculiar and delicate situation in which we are
  placed: but all our embarrassments will cease, if your Majesty deign
  to lend an ear to our Address. Your royal heart will feel the delicacy
  of the impulse by which we are guided at this moment, and will accept
  our sincere wishes to serve your Majesty and our country with our
  accustomed zeal and fidelity.”

  It was difficult to obtain signatures to so moderate an Address. Would
  it be believed, that this candid and authentic avowal of our past
  functions, and the use of the phrase “Emperor Napoleon,” in
  particular, were held as objections to it? Every one found fault with
  it according to his humour. Such were the sentiments of the day. Only
  seventeen signatures could be collected. Eighteen or twenty persons
  promised to add their names when the list should amount to
  twenty-five; but nobody would assist in completing that number. Two of
  those, who had already signed it, thinking they had put their hand to
  a document which they did not well understand, their sole intention
  having been to solicit the confirmation of their appointments, even
  went so far as to erase their signatures. The original copy of this
  document must be either at Paris or Versailles, in the hands of one of
  the persons who signed it.

THE EMPEROR’S IDEA OF RESERVING CORSICA.—HIS OPINION OF ROBESPIERRE.—HIS
    IDEAS RESPECTING PUBLIC OPINION.—EXPIATORY INTENTION OF THE EMPEROR
    WITH REGARD TO THE VICTIMS OF THE REVOLUTION.

18th.—After the accustomed occupation of the day, I accompanied the
Emperor to the garden about four o’clock. He had just completed his
dictation on the subject of Corsica. Having concluded every thing he had
to say relative to that island, and to Paoli, he adverted to the
interest which he himself excited there, while yet so young, at the time
of his separation from Paoli. He added that latterly he might to a
certainty have united in his favour the wishes, the sentiments, and the
efforts of the whole population of Corsica; and that, had he retired to
that island on quitting Paris, he would have been beyond the reach of
any foreign power whatever. He had an idea of doing so when he abdicated
in favour of his son. He was on the point of reserving to himself the
possession of Corsica during his life. No obstacle at sea would have
obstructed his passage thither. But he abandoned that design for the
sake of rendering his abdication the more sincere and the more
advantageous to France. His residence in the centre of the
Mediterranean, in the bosom of Europe, so near France and Italy, might
have furnished a lasting pretext to the Allies. He even preferred
America to England, from the same motive and the same idea. It is true
that, in the sincerity of his own measures, he neither did, nor could
foresee, his unjust and violent banishment to St. Helena.

The Emperor, next proceeding to take a review of different points of the
Revolution, dwelt particularly on Robespierre, whom he did not know, but
whom he believed to be destitute of talent, energy, or system. He
considered him, notwithstanding, merely as the scapegoat of the
Revolution, sacrificed as soon as he endeavoured to arrest it in its
course:—the common fate, he observed, of all who, before himself
(Napoleon) had ventured to take that step. The Terrorists and their
doctrine survived Robespierre; and if their excesses were not continued,
it was because they were obliged to bow to public opinion. They threw
all the blame on Robespierre; but the latter declared shortly before his
death, that he was a stranger to the recent executions, and that he had
not appeared in the Committees for six weeks previously. Napoleon
confessed that, while he was with the army of Nice, he had seen some
long letters addressed by Robespierre to his brother, condemning the
horrors of the Commissioners of the Convention, who, as he expressed it,
were ruining the Revolution by their tyranny and atrocities.
“Cambaceres, who,” observed the Emperor, “must be a good authority on
subjects relating to that period, answered an enquiry which I one day
addressed to him respecting the condemnation of Robespierre, in these
remarkable words: ‘Sire, that was a sentence without a trial;’ adding
that Robespierre had more foresight and conception than was generally
imagined; and that his intention was, after subduing the unbridled
factions which he had to oppose, to restore a system of order and
moderation. ‘Some time previously to his fall,’ added Cambaceres, ‘he
delivered a most admirable speech on this subject; it was not thought
proper to insert it in the Moniteur, and all trace of it is now lost.’”

This is not the first instance I have heard of omissions and want of
accuracy in the Moniteur. In the reports inserted in that journal
relative to the proceedings of the Assembly, there must be a period
remarkable for incorrectness; as the minutes of those proceedings were
for a time arbitrarily drawn up by one of the Committees.

Those who are induced to believe that Robespierre was at once wearied,
satiated, and alarmed by the Revolution, and had resolved on checking
it, affirm that he would not take any decided step until after he had
read his famous speech. He considered it so fine that he had no doubt of
its effect on the Assembly. If this be true, his mistake or his vanity
cost him dear. Those who think differently assert that Danton and
Camille-des-Moulins had precisely the same views; and yet that
Robespierre sacrificed them. To these it is replied that Robespierre
sacrificed them to preserve his popularity, because he judged that the
decisive moment had not yet arrived; or because he did not wish to
resign to them the glory of the enterprise.

Be this as it may, it is certain that the nearer we approach to the
instruments and the agents in that catastrophe, the greater obscurity
and mystery we find; and this uncertainty will but increase with time.
Thus the page of history will, on this point as on many others, become
the record, not so much of the events which really occurred, as of the
statements which are given of them.

In the course of our conversation relative to Robespierre, the Emperor
said that he had been very well acquainted with his brother, the younger
Robespierre, the representative to the Army of Italy. He said nothing
against this young man, whom he had led into action and inspired with
great confidence and considerable enthusiasm for his person; so much so,
that previously to the 9th of Thermidor, young Robespierre, being
recalled by his brother, who was then secretly laying his plans,
insisted on Napoleon’s accompanying him to Paris. The latter experienced
the greatest difficulty in ridding himself of the importunity, and, at
length, only escaped it by requesting the interference of the
General-in-chief Dumerbion, whose entire confidence he possessed, and
who represented that it was absolutely necessary he should remain where
he was. “Had I followed young Robespierre,” said the Emperor, “how
different might have been my career! On what trivial circumstances does
human fate depend!—Some office would doubtless have been assigned to me;
and I might at that moment have been destined to attempt a sort of
Vendemiaire. But I was then very young; my ideas were not yet fixed. It
is probable, indeed, that I should not have undertaken any task that
might have been allotted to me; but supposing the contrary case, and
even admitting that I had been successful, what results could I have
hoped for? In Vendemiaire the revolutionary fever was totally subdued;
in Thermidor it was still raging in its utmost fury and at its greatest
height.”

“Public opinion,” said the Emperor, on another occasion, when conversing
on another subject, “is an invisible and mysterious power which it is
impossible to resist: nothing is more unsteady, more vague, or more
powerful; and capricious as it may be, it is, nevertheless, just and
reasonable more frequently than is supposed. On becoming Provisional
Consul, the first act of my administration was the banishment of fifty
anarchists. Public opinion, which had at first been furiously hostile to
them, suddenly turned in their favour, and I was forced to retract. But
some time afterwards, these same anarchists, having shewn a disposition
to engage in plots, were again overthrown by that very public opinion,
which had now returned to support me. Thus, through the errors that were
committed at the time of the restoration, popularity was secured to the
regicides, who but a moment before had been proscribed by the great mass
of the nation.

“It belonged to me only,” continued the Emperor, “to shed a lustre over
the memory of Louis XVI. in France, and to purify the nation of the
crimes with which it had been sullied by frantic acts and unfortunate
fatalities. The Bourbons, being of the royal family, and coming from
abroad, merely avenged their own private cause, and augmented the
national opprobrium. I, on the contrary, being one of the people, should
have raised the character of the nation, by banishing from society, in
her name, those whose crimes had disgraced her. This was my intention,
but I proceeded prudently in the fulfilment of it. The three expiatory
altars at St. Denis were but a prelude to my design. The Temple of
Glory, on the site of the _Magdelaine_, was to have been devoted to this
object with still greater solemnity. There, near the tomb and over the
very bones of the political victims of our revolution, monuments and
religious ceremonies would have consecrated their memory in the name of
the French people. This is a secret that was not known to above ten
individuals: though it had been found necessary to communicate a hint of
the design to those who were intrusted with the arrangement of the
edifice. I should not have executed my scheme in less than ten years;
but what precautions had I not adopted; how carefully had I smoothed
every difficulty, and removed every obstruction! All would have
applauded my design, and no one would have suffered from it. So much
depends on circumstances and forms,” added he, “that in my reign, Carnot
would not have dared to write a memorial, boasting of the death of the
King, though he did so under the Bourbons. I should have leagued with
public opinion in punishing him; while public opinion sided with him in
rendering him unassailable.”

                           CASCADE AT BRIARS.

19th.—My son and I rose very early. Our task had been finished on the
preceding day; and as the Emperor could not want me for some time, we
availed ourselves of the fineness of the morning to explore the
neighbourhood of our abode.

Passing through the valley of James-Town, on the right of our little
level height at Briars, was a deep ravine, the sides of which were
intersected by numerous perpendicular cliffs. We descended into the
ravine, not without difficulty, and found ourselves at the edge of a
little limpid streamlet, beside which grew abundance of cresses. We
amused ourselves by gathering them as we passed along; and after a few
windings we soon reached the extremity of the valley and the streamlet,
which are closed transversely by a huge pointed mass of rock, from the
summit of which issues a pretty cascade, produced from the waters of the
surrounding-heights. This water-fall descending into the valley forms
the streamlet along which we had just passed, and which rolls sometimes
in a rapid stream to the sea. The water of the cascade was at this
moment dispersed above our heads in small rain or light vapour; but in
stormy weather it rushes forth in a torrent, and furiously dashes
through the ravine till it reaches the sea. To us the scene presented a
gloomy, solitary, and melancholy aspect; though it was altogether so
interesting that we quitted it with regret.

To-day was Sunday, and we all dined with the Emperor; he good humouredly
observed that we composed his state party. After dinner the circle of
our amusements was not very extensive: he asked us whether we would have
a comedy, an opera, or a tragedy. We decided in favour of a comedy, and
he himself read a portion of Moliere’s _Avare_, which was continued by
other individuals of the party. The Emperor had a cold, and was slightly
feverish. He withdrew early from his walk in the garden, and desired me
to see him again that evening, if he should not have gone to bed. My son
and I accompanied the rest of the gentlemen to the town; and on our
return, the Emperor had retired to rest.

              FIRST AND ONLY EXCURSION DURING OUR ABODE AT
                      BRIARS. THE ADMIRAL’s BALL.

20th.—The Emperor, after dictating as usual to one of the gentlemen,
called me about five o’clock. He was alone; the rest of the gentlemen
and my son having gone to the town, where the Admiral was that evening
to give a ball. The Emperor and I walked along the road leading to the
town, until we came within sight of the sea and the shipping. On the
left, in the depth of the valley, was a pretty little house. The Emperor
stood for a considerable time with his glass at his eye, examining the
garden, which appeared to be very well cultivated, and in which a group
of beautiful children were at play, attended by their mother. We were
informed that this house belonged to Major Hudson, a resident in the
island, the same gentleman who had lent me the _Annual Register_. The
house was situated at the bottom of the ravine which commences in the
vicinity of Briars, and near the curious cascade which I have already
noticed. The Emperor took a fancy to go down to the house, though it was
now nearly six o’clock. The road was extremely steep: we found it longer
and more difficult of descent than we had expected; and we reached the
bottom of the ravine quite out of breath. We took a survey of the little
domain, which had evidently been laid out as the residence of a
permanent occupant, and not as the mere temporary abode of a traveller
passing to a foreign land; and, after receiving the attentions of the
master of the house, and paying a few compliments to the mistress, the
Emperor took his leave.

But the evening was already far advanced, and we were very much
fatigued; we therefore accepted the horses that were offered us, and
speedily returned to our hut and our dinner. This little excursion, and
the exercise of riding on horseback, which had been so long
relinquished, seemed to do the Emperor good.

He desired that I would go to the Admiral’s ball, in spite of my
reluctance to leave him. At half-past eight o’clock he observed that the
night was dark, the road bad, and that it was time I had set out. He
insisted on my leaving him, and he entered his room, where I saw him
undress and retire to bed. He again desired me to go, and I unwillingly
obeyed. I left him alone; and thus, for the first time, violated a
custom which had become most dear to me.

I proceeded on foot to the town. The Admiral had given great _éclat_ to
his ball. It had been talked of for a considerable time before. He
wished it to be understood that the entertainment was given solely on
our account, and we had been formally invited. Was it most advisable to
accept or to decline the invitation? Something might be said on both
sides. Political misfortunes did not require that we should assume the
appearance of domestic sorrow; it might be proper, and even useful, to
mingle cheerfully in company with our jailors. We might, therefore,
adopt either resolution indifferently. We determined to go. But what
sort of conduct were we to observe? Should we assume pride, or employ
address? The first might be attended with inconvenience; in our
situation every wounded pretension became an insult. In the second there
could be no impropriety: to receive marks of politeness as though we
were accustomed to them, and as though they were our due, and to
overlook any little want of respect, was certainly the wisest course. I
arrived at the ball very late, and left it very early. I was much
pleased with the entertainment in every respect.

               MY CONDUCT WHILE THE EMPEROR WAS AT ELBA.

21st—22nd. The Emperor, who had often questioned me on the line of
conduct pursued by many of his ministers, members of his Council, and
officers of his Household, during his residence at the Island of Elba,
at length called me to account in my turn, saying:—“But you yourself,
Las Cases, what did you do after the arrival of the King? What happened
to you all that time? Come, sir, make a report on that subject: you know
this is my way; and it is the only plan by which we can properly
classify what we say, or what we wish to learn. Besides, it will furnish
you with another article for your Journal. And, don’t you see?“ added
he, jokingly, “your biographers will only have the trouble of
extracting; the thing will be all ready written to their hands.”

“Sire,” I replied, “you shall have a literal statement of every thing;
though I have but little to say. I commanded, on the 31st of March, the
10th legion of the National Guard of Paris, that of the Legislative
Body. We lost, during the day, a considerable number of men. At night I
heard of the capitulation; I wrote to the officer next in rank to
myself, and transferred to him the command of my legion, informing him
that, though in my quality of member of the Council of State I had
previously received orders to proceed elsewhere, yet I had not wished to
abandon my legion at the moment of danger; but that the event which had
just occurred having changed the aspect of affairs, I must now proceed
forthwith to fulfil new duties.

“At day-break I set out on the road to Fontainebleau, and found myself
in the midst of the wrecks of Marmont’s and Mortier’s detachments. I was
on foot, but I doubted not I should be able to purchase a horse. I soon,
however, discovered that soldiers in retreat are neither just nor civil.
At that disastrous moment, my uniform of a National Guard was insulted,
and I was myself ill-treated.

“After an hour’s walk, overpowered by the fatigue of the journey, joined
to the want of rest which I had experienced for two or three nights
previously; seeing around me no face that I knew, and having no hope of
procuring a horse, I determined, with a sorrowful heart, to return to
the capital.

“The National Guard was ordered out to assist in the triumphant entry of
the enemy: there was even a probability of its being selected as a guard
of honour to the Sovereigns who had conquered us. I determined to be
absent from my home. I had conveyed my wife and children safely out of
Paris a week or two before, and for a few days had recourse to the
hospitality of a friend. I never went out of doors but in a shabby great
coat, visiting the coffee-houses and public places, and joining the
different groups which were formed in the streets. My object was to make
observations on persons and things, and above all, to learn the real
feeling of the people. How many extraordinary occurrences did I not
witness in the course of my rambles!

“I saw in front of the residence of the Emperor of Russia, men
distinguished by their rank, and calling themselves Frenchmen, exerting
their utmost endeavours to induce the rabble to call out ‘_Long live
Alexander, our deliverer!_’

“I saw, Sire, your monument on the Place Vendôme resist the efforts of a
few wretches, belonging to the lowest dregs of the people, who had been
hired by persons of note.

“Finally, in one of the comers of the Place Vendôme, before the hotel of
the Commandant of the place, I saw one of the officers of your household
trying, on the first evening after your departure, to prevail on young
conscripts to enter another service than yours; but he received from
them a lesson that might have made him blush for his own conduct, had he
been capable of feeling shame.

“Doubtless, those to whom I here allude will exclaim that I mingled with
the _rabble_; and yet it may with justice be affirmed that the acts of
baseness which then disgraced France did not originate with the rabble.
These acts were far from obtaining the countenance of the lower classes
of the people; on the contrary, they were decidedly censured by the
uprightness, generosity, and nobleness of sentiment, manifested in the
public streets. What reproaches might I not convey, were I to repeat all
that I heard on this subject!

“Your Majesty abdicated. I had refused my signature to the act of
adherence of the Council of State; but I thought I might make amends for
this by an additional act of adherence. The Moniteur was every day
filled with articles of this kind; mine however was not deemed worthy
the honour of insertion.

“At length the King arrived: he was henceforth our sovereign. He
appointed a day for the reception of those individuals who had been
presented to Louis XVI. I proceeded to the Tuileries to avail myself of
this prerogative.—What were my reflections on entering those apartments
which had so lately been filled with your glory and power! And yet I
presented myself to the King sincerely and in good faith; my foresight
never led me even to think of your return.

“Deputations to the King were multiplied beyond number: a meeting of the
officers of the naval establishment was proposed. To the person who
communicated this fact to me I replied that nothing could be more
gratifying to my heart than to join my old comrades, none of whom could
entertain sentiments purer than I did; but that the offices I had filled
placed me in a peculiar and delicate situation, and that motives of
prudence must deter me from appearing where the zeal of a president
might lead him to employ expressions which I neither could nor would
sanction by my opinion or presence.

“Subsequently, however, in spite of my mortification and disgust, I
determined, at the solicitation of some friends, to think of something
for myself. The Council of State was re-composed; several members of the
last Council assured me, in spite of my recent conjectures on that
point, that nothing was easier than to retain my office; that they had
succeeded merely by an application to the Chancellor of France. I had
not courage to venture a moment’s encroachment on his Lordship’s time:
and therefore contented myself with writing to acquaint him that I had
been Master of Requests to the last Council of State; and that, if that
circumstance were not sufficient to exclude me from becoming a member of
the new assembly, I begged him to recommend me to the King as a
Councillor of State. I observed that I would not advance as claims to
favour my eleven years’ emigration or the loss of my patrimony in the
King’s cause. At that period I had only done what I then considered to
be my duty; which I had at all times, to the best of my knowledge,
fulfilled faithfully and to the last moment. This phrase, as may well be
supposed, deprived me even of the honour of a reply.

“Meanwhile the new situation of Paris, the sight of the foreign troops,
the acclamations of every kind, were more than I could endure; and I
adopted the determination of going for a short time to London, where I
should meet with old friends, who might afford me all the consolation of
which I was susceptible. Then, again, I recollected that I might find in
London the same tumult and the same exultation that had driven me from
Paris; this proved to be the fact. London was the scene of festivity and
rejoicing, to celebrate the triumphs of the English and our humiliation.

“During my stay in London, the marine establishment was re-modelled at
Paris, and the Chevalier de Grimaldi, one of my old comrades, whom I had
not seen or heard of for a length of time, was appointed a member of the
Committee. He called on my wife, and expressed his surprise that I had
not put in my claims; observing that I was entitled, by law, to return
to the corps, or to retire on a certain pension. He advised my wife to
bring me to a decision on the subject, and to rely on his friendship;
adding that there was no time to be lost. I attached higher value to
this mark of attention than to the favour which it was intended to
procure me. However, I wrote to the Committee, requesting that, as I was
desirous of wearing a uniform to which I had become attached, I might be
allowed to enjoy the honorary title of _Capitaine de Vaisseau_; while at
the same time I renounced the pension, to which I did not conceive
myself entitled.

“I returned to Paris. The diversity of opinions and the irritation of
the public mind were extreme. I had for a long time lived in the
greatest retirement. I now confined myself entirely to the domestic
circle of my wife and children. Never at any former period of my life
did I prove myself a better husband or a better father; and never,
perhaps, was I more physically happy.

“As I was one day reading, in the _Journal des Debats_, an account of a
work of M. Beauchamp, I found mentioned the names of several gentlemen
who were stated to have assembled on the Place Louis XV. on the 31st
March, to excite sentiments in favour of royalty; and my name was among
the number. It was in good company, no doubt; but at the same time the
statement was untrue; and I should have been considerably lowered in the
estimation of many if it had been believed. I wrote to request a
correction of the error, which was calculated to render me the subject
of congratulations to which I was in no way entitled.

“I observed that it was out of my power at the time to act in the way
described, whatever might have been my inclination. As the commander of
a legion of the National Guard, I had contracted obligations from which
no consideration on earth could free me, &c. I sent my letter to the
deputy Chabaud-Latour, one of the proprietors of the _Journal des
Debats_, a man for whom I entertained a great esteem. He declined
publishing my letter, purely from good intentions towards me. I then
addressed it to the editor; but he refused to insert it on account of
difference of opinion.

“Meanwhile, the state of the public mind indicated an inevitable and
speedy catastrophe. Every thing foreboded that the Bourbons would share
the fate of the Stuarts. My wife and I used every evening to amuse
ourselves in reading Hume’s History of England. We began at Charles I.,
and your Majesty arrived before we had got to James II.” (Here the
Emperor could not repress a laugh.)

“Your Majesty’s advance and arrival,” continued I, “were to us a subject
of the greatest astonishment and anxiety. I was far from foreseeing the
honourable voluntary exile which it would gain for me in the end; for I
was then little known to your Majesty; and circumstances arising out of
that event alone brought me here. Had I filled the most trivial post
under the King; had I even been a frequent attendant at the Tuileries,
which would have been very natural and consistent with propriety, I
should not have appeared for a length of time in your Majesty’s
presence. Not, indeed, that I should have had any thing to reproach
myself with, or that my attachment to you would have been the less
sincere; but because I should not have wished to pass for a piece of
court furniture, or to seem always ready to offer incense at the shrine
of power. I should have awaited an appointment, instead of pressing
forward to solicit one. But as it was, I felt myself so much at liberty,
every thing about me was in such perfect harmony, that I seemed to form
a part of the great event. I therefore eagerly hastened to meet the
first glance of your Majesty; I felt as though I had claims on your
kindness and favour. On your return from Waterloo, the same sentiments
brought me immediately and spontaneously near your person, which I have
never since quitted. If I was then attracted by your public glory, I am
now attached by your private virtues; and if it be true that the
gratification of my feelings then cost me some sacrifice, I now find
myself repaid a hundred-fold, by the happiness I enjoy in being able to
tell you so.

“It would however be difficult to describe the extreme disgust I felt at
every thing during the ten months of your absence. I felt an utter
contempt for mankind and worldly vanities. Every illusion was destroyed,
all interest had vanished. Every thing appeared to be at an end, or to
be undeserving of the smallest value. During my emigration, I had
received the cross of St. Louis; an ordinance decreed that it was to be
legitimated by a new brevet. I had not spirit to put in my claim.
Another ordinance directed that the titles bestowed by your Majesty
should be sent in to be confirmed; but I felt indifferent with regard to
compromising those which I had obtained during the Empire. In fine, I
received a letter from the Marine department, informing me that my
captain’s commission had just been forwarded thither, and there it still
remains.

“Your Majesty’s absence was to me a widowhood, the affliction and grief
of which I concealed from no one. But on your return I was repaid for
all by the testimony borne by those who surrounded you, and to whom I
had previously been scarcely known. At your Majesty’s first levee, the
individual who was _ad interim_ at the head of the department of foreign
affairs, coming from the presence, took me aside to a window, and told
me to go home and prepare, as I should probably have to set out on a
journey. He had just, he said, proposed me to your Majesty, adding that
he had represented me as a madman, but mad for love of you. I wished to
know whither I was to be sent; but that, he said, he neither would nor
could tell me. I never heard any thing more of the matter.

“M. Regnault de Saint-Jean d’Angeli placed me on the list of the
Imperial Commissioners whom your Majesty sent to the departments, I
assured him that I was ready to do any thing; but I observed that I was
a _noble_ and an _emigrant_, and that these two words pronounced by the
first comer would be sufficient to annihilate me, in case of necessity,
at any time or in any place. He acknowledged the justice of my
observation, and relinquished his intention.

“A Senator next solicited that your Majesty would appoint me to the
prefecture of Metz, his native town. He requested me to make this
sacrifice for only three months, in order, as he said, to conciliate the
popular mind, and set things to rights. At length Decrés and the Duke of
Bassano proposed me as a Councillor of State; and, the third day after
your arrival, your Majesty signed my appointment.”

23rd.—The Emperor was still indisposed: he confined himself to his room,
and would see nobody. He sent for me at 9 o’clock in the evening. I
found him very low-spirited and melancholy. He scarcely spoke to me, and
I did not dare to say anything to him. If I regarded his illness as
merely physical, it grieved me sincerely:—if he laboured under mental
affliction, how much more was I grieved that I could not employ all the
resources of consolation with which the heart naturally overflows for
those whom we truly love. The Emperor dismissed me in about half an
hour.

24th.—The Emperor continued indisposed, and still declined seeing any
body. He sent for me to dine with him at a late hour. Dinner was served
on a little table beside the sofa on which he was lying. He ate
heartily. He said that he stood in need of some sudden revulsion of the
constitution, which he should soon obtain; so well did he understand his
own temperament. After dinner he took up the Memoirs of Marshal de
Villars, which amused him. He read aloud many passages, which revived
former recollections, and gave rise to many anecdotes.

               THE EMPEROR’S TEMPERAMENT.—RIDING.—NOTIONS
                              OF MEDICINE.

25th.—The Emperor still continued unwell: he had passed a bad night. At
his desire I dined with him beside the sofa, which he was unable to
leave. He was, however, evidently much better. After dinner he wished to
read. He had a heap of books scattered around him on the sofa. The
rapidity of his imagination, the fatigue of dwelling always on the same
subject, or of reading what he already knew, caused him to take up and
throw down the books one after the other. At length he fixed on Racine’s
Iphigenia, and amused himself by pointing out the beauties, and
discussing the few faults, to be found in that work. He dismissed me at
an early hour.

Contrary to the general opinion, in which I myself once participated,
the Emperor is far from possessing a strong constitution. His limbs are
large, but his fibres are relaxed. With a very expanded chest, he is
constantly labouring under the effects of cold. His body is subject to
the influence of the slightest accidents. The smell of paint is
sufficient to make him ill; certain dishes, or the slightest degree of
damp, immediately take a severe effect on him. His body is far from
being a body of iron, as is generally supposed: all his strength is in
his mind. His prodigious exertions abroad and his incessant labours at
home are known to every one. No sovereign ever underwent so much bodily
fatigue. The most remarkable instance of the Emperor’s activity and
exertion was his riding post from Valladolid to Burgos, (a distance of
thirty-five Spanish leagues) in five hours and a half; that is to say,
upwards of seven leagues an hour.[25] The Emperor had set out
accompanied by a numerous escort, in case of danger from the Guerillas;
but at every yard he left some of his company behind him, and he arrived
at Burgos with but few followers. His ride from Vienna to the Simmering,
a distance of eighteen or twenty leagues, is also frequently talked of.
The Emperor rode to breakfast at the Simmering, and returned to Vienna
immediately after. Napoleon often hunted to the distance of thirty-eight
leagues, and never less than fifteen. One day a Russian officer, who had
come as a courier from St. Petersburg in the space of twelve or thirteen
days, arrived at Fontainebleau at the moment when the Emperor was about
to set out on a hunt. By way of a rest, the officer had the honour to be
invited to join the hunting-party. He of course accepted the invitation;
but he dropped down in the forest, overcome by fatigue, and was not
found until after considerable search had been made for him.

Footnote 25:

  This may appear incredible. Indeed I myself feel doubts now when I
  read over the statement. But I know that when the subject was spoken
  of one day at dinner at Longwood, it underwent much discussion, and I
  noted down on paper what was then admitted to be the correct account.
  Besides, many individuals who accompanied the Emperor are still
  living: and the fact may be ascertained.

I have known the Emperor to be engaged in business in the Council of
State for eight or nine hours successively, and afterwards rise with his
ideas as clear as when he sat down. I have seen him at St. Helena peruse
books for ten or twelve hours in succession, on the most abstruse
subjects, without appearing in the least fatigued. He has suffered,
unmoved, the greatest shocks that ever man experienced. On his return
from Moscow or Leipsic, after he had communicated the disastrous event
in the Council of State, he said:—“It has been reported in Paris that
this misfortune turned my hair grey; but you see it is not so (pointing
to his head); and I hope I shall be able to support many other
reverses.” But these prodigious exertions are made only, as it were, in
despite of his physical powers, which never appear less susceptible than
when his mind is in full activity.

The Emperor eats very irregularly, but generally very little. He often
says that a man may hurt himself by eating too much, but never by eating
too little. He will remain four-and-twenty hours without eating, only to
get an appetite for the ensuing day. But if he eats little, he drinks
still less. A single glass of Madeira or Champaign is sufficient to
restore his strength, and to produce cheerfulness of spirits. He sleeps
very little and very irregularly, generally rising at daybreak to read
or write, and afterwards lying down to sleep again.

The Emperor has no faith in medicine, and never takes any. He had
adopted a peculiar mode of treatment for himself. Whenever he found
himself unwell, his plan was to run into an extreme, the opposite of
what happened to be his habit at the time. This he calls restoring the
equilibrium of nature. If, for instance, he had been inactive for a
length of time, he would suddenly ride about sixty miles, or hunt for a
whole day. If, on the contrary, he had been harassed by great fatigues,
he would resign himself to a state of absolute rest for twenty-four
hours. These unexpected shocks infallibly brought about an internal
crisis, and instantly produced the desired effect: this remedy, he
observed, never failed.

The Emperor’s lymphatic system is deranged, and his blood circulates
with difficulty. Nature, he said, had endowed him with two important
advantages: the one was the power of sleeping whenever he needed repose,
at any hour, and in any place; another was that he was incapable of
committing any injurious excess either in eating or drinking. “If,” said
he, “I go the least beyond my mark, my stomach instantly revolts.” He is
subject to nausea from very slight causes; a mere tickling cough is
sufficient to produce that effect on him.

            OUR MODE OF LIVING AT BRIARS.—MY FIRST VISIT TO
                LONGWOOD.—INFERNAL MACHINE; ITS HISTORY.

26th—28th. On the 26th the Emperor dressed very early: he found himself
quite recovered. He wished to walk out, as the weather was very fine;
and, besides, his room had not been put in order for three days. We went
into the garden, and he chose to breakfast under the arbour. He was in
good spirits, and his conversation turned upon many different subjects
and persons.

The Emperor’s health being now perfectly restored, he resumed his usual
occupation, which, indeed, was his only source of amusement. Reading,
dictating, and walking in the garden, filled up all his time during the
day. He still occasionally resorted to his favourite path, though the
turn of the season, and the change of the moon, had nearly put a stop to
our evening walks. The numerous visitors who came to Mr. Balcombe’s
house, attracted by the hope of meeting the Emperor, annoyed him very
much, and, indeed, compelled him to withdraw himself altogether. We
therefore remained shut up in our little dwelling. We at first
understood that we should remain at Briars only a few days; but six
weeks had passed away, and we had yet heard nothing respecting our
removal. All this time the Emperor had been as much confined as he had
been on board of the vessel. He had taken only one excursion, which was
when he visited Major Hudson; and we afterwards learned that this
circumstance had occasioned alarm. It had been whispered about at the
Admiral’s ball, and had reached the ears of our high authorities, who
were thrown into great consternation by the event.

The workmen continued their labours at Longwood, which was to be our new
residence. The troops who had come with us from England were encamped in
the neighbourhood. The Colonel gave a ball, to which we were invited.
The Emperor wished me to go, and that I should, at the same time, take
the opportunity of inspecting our future abode. I went with Madame
Bertrand, in a carriage drawn by six oxen. In this Merovingian equipage
we proceeded to Longwood. This was the first opportunity I had had of
seeing any part of the island, except the neighbourhood of Briars. The
whole road along which we passed presented continued evidences of a
great natural convulsion. We saw nothing but huge masses of rock,
totally destitute of vegetation. If, at every change of the horizon, we
perceived a trace of verdure or a few clusters of trees, yet on a nearer
approach, all vanished like the creations of a poet’s fancy; we found
only a few marine plants and wild shrubs; or, what was still worse, some
wretched gum-trees. These were the only ornaments of Longwood. I
returned on horseback about six o’clock. The Emperor put many questions
to me concerning our new residence. Finding that I did not speak of it
very enthusiastically, he asked at once whether he should gain or lose
by the change? I told him what I thought in one sentence. “Sire,” said
I, “we are here in a cage; there we shall be in a fold.”

28th.—The Emperor changed his military uniform, which he had put on to
go on board the Bellerophon, for a fancy dress coat. In the course of
conversation this day the Emperor adverted to the numerous conspiracies
which had been formed against him. The infernal machine was mentioned in
its turn. This diabolical invention, which gave rise to so many
conjectures, and caused the death of so many victims, was the work of
the Royalists, who obtained the first idea of it from the Jacobins.

The Emperor stated that a hundred furious Jacobins, the real authors of
the scenes of September, the 10th of August, &c., had resolved to get
rid of the First Consul, for which purpose they invented a 15 or
16-pound howitzer, which, on being thrown into the carriage, would
explode by its own concussion, and hurl destruction on every side. To
make sure of their object, they proposed to lay chevaux de frise along a
part of the road, which, by suddenly impeding the horses, would of
course render it impossible for the carriage to move on. The man who was
employed to lay down the chevaux de frise, entertaining some suspicions
of the job which he had been set upon, as well as of the morality of his
employers, communicated the business to the police. The conspirators
were soon traced, and were apprehended near the Jardin des Plantes, in
the act of trying the effect of the machine, which made a terrible
explosion. The First Consul, whose policy it was not to divulge the
numerous conspiracies of which he was the object, did not give publicity
to this, but contented himself with imprisoning the criminals. He soon
relaxed his orders for keeping them in close confinement, and they were
allowed a certain degree of liberty. In the same prison in which these
Jacobins were confined, some Royalists were also imprisoned for an
attempt to assassinate the First Consul, by means of air-guns. These two
parties formed a league together; and the Royalists transmitted to their
friends out of prison the idea of the infernal machine, as being
preferable to any other plan of destruction.

It is very remarkable that, on the evening of the catastrophe, the
Emperor expressed an extreme repugnance to go out. Madame Buonaparte and
some intimate friends absolutely forced him to go to an Oratorio. They
roused him from a sofa where he was fast asleep; one fetched him his
sword, and another his hat. As he drove along in the carriage, he fell
asleep again, and awoke suddenly, saying that he had dreamed he was
drowning in the Tagliamento. To explain what he alluded to, it is
necessary to mention that some years previously, when he was General of
the army of Italy, he passed the Tagliamento in his carriage during the
night, contrary to the advice of every one about him. In the ardour of
youth, and heedless of every obstacle, he crossed the river surrounded
by a hundred men armed with poles and torches. His carriage was,
however, soon set afloat; Napoleon incurred the most imminent danger,
and for some time gave himself up for lost. At the moment when he now
awoke, on his way to the Oratorio, he was in the midst of a
conflagration, the carriage was lifted up, and the passage of the
Tagliamento came fresh upon his mind. The illusion, however, was but
momentary; a dreadful explosion immediately ensued. “We are blown up!”
exclaimed the First Consul to Lannes and Bessieres, who were in the
carriage with him. They were for stopping the carriage, but the First
Consul enjoined them not to do it on any account. He arrived safe, and
appeared at the Opera as though nothing had happened. He was preserved
by the desperate driving of his coachman. The machine injured only one
or two individuals who closed the escort.

The most trivial circumstances often lead to the most important results.
The coachman was intoxicated, and there is no doubt that this proved the
means of saving the life of the First Consul. The man’s intoxication was
so great that it was not until next morning he could be made to
comprehend what had happened. He had taken the explosion for the firing
of a salute. Immediately after this event, measures were adopted against
the Jacobins, who had been convicted of meditating the crime: and a
considerable number were banished. They, however, were not the real
criminals, whose discovery was brought about by another very singular
chance.

Three or four hundred drivers of _fiacres_ subscribed a louis or twelve
francs each to give a dinner to the First Consul’s coachman, who had
become the hero of the day and the boast of his profession. During the
feast, one of the guests drinking to the health of the First Consul’s
coachman, observed that he knew who had played him the trick, alluding
to the explosion of the machine. He was immediately arrested, and it
appeared that, on the very night, or the night preceding the explosion,
he had drawn up his _fiacre_ beside a gate, whence had issued the little
cart that had done all the mischief. The police proceeded to the place,
and it was found to be a coach-yard, where all kinds of vehicles were
lent on hire. The keepers of the yard did not deny the fact; they
pointed out the stall in which the cart stood; it still presented traces
of gunpowder. The proprietors declared that they were given to
understand the cart had been hired by some Bretons who were concerned in
smuggling. The man who had sold the horse, together with every
individual who had participated in the affair, were easily traced out;
and it was proved that the plot had been formed by the Chouan Royalists.
Some active and intelligent men were despatched to their head-quarters
in Morbihan. They took no pains to conceal their share in the
transaction, and only regretted that it had not succeeded. Some of them
were apprehended and brought to punishment. It is said that the chief
conspirator afterwards turned Trappist, and sought to expiate his crime
by religious austerities.

CONSPIRACY OF GEORGES, PICHEGRU, &C.—THE DUKE D’ENGHIEN.—THE SLAVE
  TOBY.—CHARACTERISTIC REFLECTIONS OF NAPOLEON.

29th—30th. I find in this part of my manuscript some important
particulars respecting the conspiracy of Georges, Pichegru, Moreau, and
the trial of the Duke d’Enghien; but, as these subjects recur repeatedly
in the course of my Journal, I transfer to another part what occurred
here, in order to bring all my information on the above points at once
under the eye of the reader.

Mr. Balcombe’s little garden, in which we so often walked, was
superintended by an old negro. The first time we saw him, the Emperor,
according to his usual custom, desired me to put some questions to him
respecting his history; and his answers strongly excited our interest.
He was a Malay Indian, and had been forced from his home by the crew of
an English vessel, and sold at St. Helena, where he had continued ever
since in slavery. His story bore every mark of truth. His countenance
had a frank and benevolent expression; his eyes were animated and
sparkling. In short his appearance was by no means abject; but, on the
contrary, truly prepossessing.

The history of the poor fellow’s misfortunes filled us with,
indignation; and a few days after, the Emperor expressed a wish to
purchase him and send him back to his own country. He mentioned the
subject to the Admiral. The latter, at first, defended his countrymen,
and declared that old Toby (which was the name of the unfortunate slave)
must be an impostor; for the thing was impossible. He, however, enquired
into the matter, and, finding that the story was but too true, he
participated in the indignation which we expressed, and promised to
exert his best endeavours for the fulfilment of our design. When we left
Briars for Longwood, poor Toby, sharing the common fate of all earthly
things, was soon forgotten; I know not what became of him.

When we were in the garden, the Emperor generally stopped near Toby’s
hut, and made me question him respecting his country, the days of his
youth, his family, his present situation, &c.: one would have supposed
that he wished to study the feelings of the old slave. By the Emperor’s
desire, I invariably closed the conversation by giving him a Napoleon.

Toby was very much attached to us; our presence always seemed to fill
him with joy. When we entered the garden, he immediately suspended his
work, and, resting on his spade, gazed on us with an air of
satisfaction. He understood not a word of the conversation that passed
between the Emperor and myself; but he always seemed to anticipate, with
a smile, the first words I translated to him. He called the Emperor the
_Good Gentleman_: this was the only name he ever applied to him, and he
knew him by no other.

I have mentioned the above particulars, because our meetings with Toby
were always followed by novel, spirited, and characteristic reflections
on the part of the Emperor. The versatility of his mind is well known.
Whenever he adverted to the poor slave’s misfortunes, he always took a
new view of the subject. I shall content myself with noting down the
following remarks:—

“Poor Toby,” said he one day, “has been torn from his family, from his
native land, and sold to slavery: could any thing be more miserable to
himself, or more criminal in others! If this crime be the act of the
English captain alone, he is doubtless one of the vilest of men; but if
it be that of the whole of the crew, it may have been committed by men,
perhaps, not so base as might be imagined; for vice is always
individual, and scarcely ever collective. Joseph’s brethren could not
bring themselves to slay him; while Judas, a cool, hypocritical,
calculating villain, betrayed his Master. A philosopher has affirmed
that men are born wicked: it would be both difficult and idle to attempt
to discover whether the assertion be true. This, at least, is certain,
that the great mass of society is not wicked; for if the majority were
determined to be criminal and to violate the laws, who would have the
power to restrain or prevent them? This is the triumph of civilization;
for this happy result springs from its bosom, and arises out of its
nature. Sentiments are for the most part traditionary; we feel them
because they were felt by those who preceded us: thus we must look to
the development of human reason and of the faculties of mankind for the
only key to social order, the only secret of the legislator. It is only
those who wish to deceive the people and rule them for their own
personal advantage that would desire to keep them in ignorance; for the
more they are enlightened, the more will they feel convinced of the
utility of laws, and of the necessity of defending them; and the more
steady, happy, and prosperous will society become. If, however,
knowledge should ever be dangerous in the multitude, it can only be when
the Government, in opposition to the interests of the people, drives
them into an unnatural situation, or dooms the lower classes to perish
for want. In such a case, knowledge would inspire them with spirit to
defend themselves, or to become criminal.

“My code alone, from its simplicity, has been more beneficial to France
than the whole mass of laws which preceded it. My schools and my system
of mutual instruction are preparing generations yet unknown. Thus,
during my reign, crimes were rapidly diminishing; while, on the
contrary, with our neighbours in England, they have been increasing to a
frightful degree. This alone is sufficient to enable any one to form a
decisive judgment of the respective governments![26]

Footnote 26:

  This fact is corroborated by authentic documents, which exhibit proofs
  more positive than might be expected. (See _Situation de l’
  Angleterre, par M. de Montvéran_.)

               FRANCE                            ENGLAND

            /—————- ————                      /—————- ————

      Inhabitants. Condemned to  Years. Inhabitants. Condemned to
                         death.                            death.

        34,000,000          882  {1801}   16,000,000        3,400

        42,000,000          392  {1811}   17,000,000        6,400

  It is obvious from this statement, that in the year 1801, in France,
  twenty-six out of a million of inhabitants were condemned to death;
  and that in 1811, ten years after, the number of condemned had
  diminished two-thirds, leaving the proportion of only nine to a
  million.

  In England, on the contrary, where, in 1801, the number of criminals
  condemned to death was 212 out of a million of inhabitants, the amount
  increased by more than one half; there being in 1811, 376 out of a
  million.

  It is worthy of observation that the condemnations in England,
  compared with those in France, were as 376 to 9, or as 42 to 1.

  The report of the state of mendicity in France, compared with that of
  the parish poor in England, also presents a prodigious difference: the
  French list, in 1812, exhibiting only 30,000 individuals out of 43
  millions of inhabitants; while in England, in the same year, a fourth
  of the population, or 4,250,000 poor, were thrown upon the
  parishes.—(_Montvéran_.)

“Look at the United States, where, without any apparent force or effort,
every thing goes on prosperously; every one is happy and contented: and
this is because the public wishes and interests are in fact the ruling
power. Place the same government at variance with the will and interests
of its inhabitants, and you would soon see what disturbance, trouble,
and confusion, and above all, what an increase of crimes, would ensue.

“When I acquired the supreme direction of affairs, it was wished that I
might become a Washington. Words cost nothing; and no doubt those who
were so ready to express the wish did so without any knowledge of times,
places, persons, or things. Had I been in America, I would willingly
have been a Washington, and I should have had little merit in so being;
for I do not see how I could reasonably have acted otherwise. But had
Washington been in France, exposed to discord within, and invasion from
without, I would have defied him to have been what he was in America; at
least, he would have been a fool to attempt it, and would only have
prolonged the existence of evil. For my own part, I could only have been
a _Crowned Washington_. It was only in a congress of kings, in the midst
of kings, yielding or subdued, that I could become so. Then and there
alone, I could successfully display Washington’s moderation,
disinterestedness, and wisdom. I could not reasonably attain to this but
by means of the _universal Dictatorship_. To this I aspired; can that be
thought a crime? Can it be believed that to resign this authority would
have been beyond the power of human nature? Sylla, glutted with crimes,
dared to abdicate, pursued by public execration! What motive could have
checked me, who would have been followed only by blessings?——But it
remained for me to conquer at Moscow!—How many will hereafter regret my
disasters and my fall!—But to require prematurely of me that sacrifice,
for which the time had not arrived, was a vulgar absurdity; and for me
to have proclaimed or promised it, would have been taken for hypocrisy
and quackery: that was not my way.——I repeat, it remained for me to
conquer at Moscow!——”

On another occasion, pausing before Toby, he said:—“What, after all, is
this poor human machine? There is not one whose exterior form is like
another, or whose internal organisation resembles the rest! And it is by
disregarding this truth that we are led to the commission of so many
errors! Had Toby been a Brutus, he would have put himself to death: if
an Æsop, he would now, perhaps, have been the Governor’s adviser; if an
ardent and zealous Christian, he would have borne his chains in the
sight of God, and blessed them. As for poor Toby, he endures his
misfortunes very quietly; he stoops to his work, and spends his days in
innocent tranquillity.” Then, after looking at him for a few moments in
silence, he turned away and said: “Certainly it is a great step from
poor Toby to a King Richard!——And yet,” continued he, as he walked
along, “the crime is not the less atrocious; for this man, after all,
had his family, his happiness, and his liberty; and it was a horrible
act of cruelty to bring him here to languish in the fetters of slavery,”
Then, suddenly stopping short, he added:—“But I read in your eyes that
you think he is not the only example of the sort at St. Helena!” And
whether he felt offended at being placed on a parallel with Toby,
whether he thought it necessary to raise my spirits, or whatever else
might be his reason, he went on with dignity and animation: “My dear Las
Cases, there is not the least resemblance here: if the outrage is of a
higher class, the victims also possess very different resources. We have
not been exposed to corporeal sufferings; or if that had been attempted,
we have souls to disappoint our tyrants! Our situation may even have its
charms! The eyes of the universe are fixed upon us! We are martyrs in an
immortal cause! Millions of human beings are weeping for us: our country
sighs, and glory mourns our fate! We here struggle against the
oppression of the gods, and the prayers of nations are for us!”—After a
pause of a few seconds, he continued:—“Besides, this is not the source
of my real sufferings! If I considered only myself, perhaps I should
have reason to rejoice! Misfortunes are not without their heroism and
their glory! Adversity was wanting to my career! Had I died on the
throne, enveloped in the dense atmosphere of my power, I should to many
have remained a problem; but now misfortune will enable all to judge of
me without disguise.“

             ORIGIN OF THE CORPS OF GUIDES.—ANOTHER DANGER
               INCURRED BY NAPOLEON.—THE GERMAN OFFICER.

December 1st—3rd. Many incidents fill up this interval: some I reject as
unnecessary, some it is proper I should withhold. I here note down only
a few anecdotes of the General-in-chief of the Army of Italy.

After the passage of the Mincio, Napoleon, having concerted all his
plans, and pursued the enemy in every direction, entered a castle on the
left bank of the river. He was troubled with the head-ache, and he used
a foot-bath. A large detachment of the enemy, in great confusion,
arrived, having ascended the river as far as the castle. Napoleon had
only a few persons with him; the sentinel on duty at the gate had just
time to close it, exclaiming, “To arms!” and the General of the Army of
Italy, in the hour of victory, was compelled to escape through the back
gates of the garden, with but one boot on. Had he been made prisoner,
before his reputation was established, the acts of genius which had
marked the commencement of his career would, perhaps, by the common run
of mankind, have been considered merely as fortunate and blameable
enterprises. The danger which the French General had just escaped (a
circumstance which, through his method of operations, was likely often
to recur) was the origin of the guides appointed to guard his person.
These guides have since been introduced in other armies.

In the same campaign, Napoleon incurred another imminent risk:—Wurmser,
who had been compelled to throw himself into Mantua, and who was
debouching suddenly on an open plain, learned from an old woman, that,
only a few moments before his arrival, the French General, with but a
few followers, had stopped at her door, and that he had fled within
sight of the Austrians. Wurmser immediately despatched parties of
cavalry in every direction, calculating with certainty on the precious
capture. “But,” said the Emperor, “I must do him this justice, he gave
particular orders that I should not be killed or harmed in any way.”
Fortunately for the young General, his happy star and the swiftness of
his horse preserved him.

The new system of military operations practised by Napoleon disconcerted
every one. The campaign was scarcely opened, when Lombardy was inundated
with troops in every direction, and the French approached Mantua
pell-mell with the enemy. The General-in-chief, when in the
neighbourhood of Pizzighitone, met a great fat German Captain or
Colonel, who had been made prisoner. Napoleon took a fancy to question
him, without being known, and enquired how affairs were going on. “Very
badly,” replied the officer; “I know not how it will end; but no one
seems to understand what is doing; we have been sent to fight a young
blockhead, who attacks you on the right and the left, in front and in
rear, so that there is no knowing how to proceed. This mode of carrying
on war is intolerable; and for my part, I am very glad to have done with
it....”

Napoleon used to relate that, after one of his great actions in Italy,
he passed over the field of battle with two or three other persons,
before the dead bodies had been interred. “In the deep silence of a
beautiful moonlight night,” said the Emperor, “a dog, leaping suddenly
from beneath the clothes of his dead master, rushed upon us, and then
immediately returned to his hiding-place, howling piteously. He
alternately licked his master’s face, and again flew at us; thus, at
once soliciting aid and seeking revenge. Whether owing to my own
particular turn of mind at the moment,” continued the Emperor, “the
time, the place, or the action itself, I know not; but certainly no
incident on any field of battle ever produced so deep an impression on
me. I involuntarily stopped to contemplate the scene. This man, thought
I, perhaps has friends in the camp or in his company; and here he lies
forsaken by all except his dog! What a lesson Nature here presents
through the medium of an animal! What a strange being is man! and how
mysterious are his impressions; I had, without emotion, ordered battles
which were to decide the fate of the army; I had beheld, with tearless
eyes, the execution of those operations, by which numbers of my
countrymen were sacrificed; and here my feelings were roused by the
mournful howling of a dog! Certainly at that moment I should have been
easily moved by a suppliant enemy; I could very well imagine Achilles
yielding up the body of Hector at the sight of Priam’s tears.”

               WAR.—PRINCIPLES.—APPLICATION.—OPINIONS ON
                           SEVERAL GENERALS.

4th—5th. My eyes had become so bad that I was obliged to suspend my
occupation: I had nearly lost my sight in the Campaign in Italy.

For some time past a sensible change had taken place in the weather. We
knew nothing about the order of the seasons. As the sun passed twice
over our heads in the course of the last year, we said we ought, at
least, to have two summers. Every thing was totally different from what
we had been accustomed to; and, to complete our embarrassments, we were
obliged, being now in the southern hemisphere, to make all our
calculations in a manner quite the reverse of that which we had
practised in Europe. It rained frequently, the air was very damp, and it
grew colder than before. The Emperor could no longer go out in the
evening; he was continually catching cold and did not sleep well. He was
obliged to give up taking his meals beneath the tent, and he had them
served up in his own chamber. Here he found himself better; but he could
not stir from his seat.

Our conversation continued after the dinner was removed from table.
To-day the Emperor attacked General Gourgaud on the elements and first
exercises of artillery. The General had recently belonged to that
department of the service, and all his professional science was quite
fresh. The discussion was very curious, and was maintained with great
spirit. Napoleon never proved himself to be the weaker party: one might
have been tempted to believe that he had just passed his examination at
the academy.

The conversation then turned on war and great commanders. “The fate of a
battle,” observed the Emperor, “is the result of a moment—of a thought:
the hostile forces advance with various combinations, they attack each
other and fight for a certain time; the critical moment arrives, a
mental flash decides, and the least reserve accomplishes the object.” He
spoke of Lützen, Bautzen, &c.; and afterwards, alluding to Waterloo, he
said, that had he followed up the idea of turning the enemy’s right, he
should easily have succeeded; he, however, preferred piercing the
centre, and separating the two armies. But all was fatal in that
engagement; it even assumed the appearance of absurdity: nevertheless,
he ought to have gained the victory. Never had any of his battles
presented less doubt to his mind; nor could he now account for what had
happened. Grouchy, he said, had lost himself; Ney appeared bewildered,
and his countenance at once expressed the remorse he felt for the
transactions of Fontainebleau and of Lons-le-Saunier; d’Erlon was
useless; in short, the generals were no longer themselves. If, in the
evening, he had been aware of Grouchy’s position, and could have thrown
himself upon it, he might, in the morning, with the help of that fine
reserve, have repaired his ill success, and perhaps, even have destroyed
the allied forces by one of those miracles, those turns of Fortune,
which were familiar to him, and which would have surprised no one. But
he knew nothing of Grouchy; and besides, it was not easy to act with
decision amongst the wrecks of the army. It would be difficult to
imagine the condition of the French army on that disastrous night; it
was a torrent dislodged from its bed, sweeping away every thing in its
course.

Turning to another subject, he said that the dangers incurred by the
military commanders of antiquity were not to be compared with those
which attend the generals of modern times. There is, he observed, no
position in which a general may not now be reached by artillery; but
anciently a general ran no risk, except when he himself charged, which
Cæsar did only twice or thrice.

“We rarely,” said he, “find, combined together, all the qualities
necessary to constitute a great general. The object most desirable is
that a man’s judgment should be in equilibrium with his personal
courage; that raises him at once above the common level.” This is what
the Emperor termed being _well squared_, both by the base and
perpendicular.

“If,” continued he, “courage be a general’s predominating quality, he
will rashly embark in enterprises above his conceptions; and, on the
other hand, he will not venture to carry his ideas into effect, if his
character or courage be inferior to his judgment.”

He then cited the example of the Viceroy, whose sole merit consisted in
this equilibrium of character, which, however, sufficed to render him a
very distinguished man.

Physical and moral courage then became the subject of discourse. “With
respect to physical courage,” the Emperor said, “it was impossible for
Murat and Ney not to be brave, but no men ever possessed less judgment;
the former in particular. As to moral courage,” observed he, “I have
very rarely met with _the two o’clock in the morning courage_. I mean,
unprepared courage, that which is necessary on an unexpected occasion,
and which, in spite of the most unforeseen events, leaves full freedom
of judgment and decision.” He did not hesitate to declare that he was
himself eminently gifted with this _two o’clock in the morning_ courage,
and that, in this respect, he had met with but few persons who were at
all equal to him. He remarked that an incorrect idea was generally
formed of the strength of mind necessary to engage in one of those great
battles on which depends the fate of an army or nation, or the
possession of a throne. “Generals,” added he, “are rarely found eager to
give battle; they choose their positions; establish themselves; consider
their combinations; but then commences their indecision: nothing is so
difficult, and at the same time so important, as to know when to
decide.”

He next proceeded to notice several generals, and condescended to reply
to some questions that were asked him. “Kleber,” said he, “was endowed
with the highest talent; but he was merely the man of the moment: he
pursued glory as the only road to enjoyment; but he had no national
sentiment, and he could, without any sacrifice, have devoted himself to
foreign service.” Kleber had commenced his youthful career among the
Prussians, to whom he continued much attached. Dessaix possessed, in a
very superior degree, the important equilibrium above described. Moreau
scarcely deserved to be placed in the first rank of generals; in him
nature had left her work unfinished; he possessed more instinct than
genius. In Lannes, courage at first predominated over judgment; but the
latter was every day gaining ground, and approaching the equilibrium. He
had become a very able commander at the period of his death. “I found
him a dwarf,” said the Emperor, “but I lost him a giant.” In another
general, whom he named, judgment was, on the contrary, superior to
courage; it could not be denied that he was a brave man; but he, like
many others, did not forget the chance of the cannon-ball.

Speaking of military ardour and courage, the Emperor said, “I know the
depth, or what I call the _draught of water_, of all my generals. Some,”
added he, joining action to his words, “will sink to the waist, some to
the chin, others over head; but the number of the latter is very small,
I assure you.” Suchet, he said, was one whose courage and judgment had
been surprisingly improved. Massena was a very superior man, and, by a
strange peculiarity of temperament, he possessed the desired equilibrium
only in the heat of battle; it was created in the midst of danger. “The
generals,” finally observed the Emperor, “who seemed destined to rise to
future distinction were Gerard, Clausel, Foy, Lamarque, &c. These were
my new marshals.”

           SITUATION OF THE SPANISH PRINCES AT VALENCEY.—THE
                POPE AT FONTAINEBLEAU.—REFLECTIONS, &C.

6th.—The Emperor, after dictating to me this morning, was successively
engaged with the other gentlemen, with whom he prolonged his walk for
some time. When they withdrew, I followed him into the lower path: he
was dull and silent, and his countenance appeared somewhat harsh and
ruffled. “Well,” said he, as we were returning to dinner, “we shall have
sentinels under our windows at Longwood. They wished to force me to have
a foreign officer at my table and in my drawing-room. I cannot mount my
horse without being accompanied by an officer; in short, we cannot stir
a step under pain of being insulted!...” I replied that this was another
drop of sorrow added to the bitter cup which we were doomed to drink to
his past glory and power; but that his philosophy was sufficient to defy
the malice of his enemies, and to make them blush for their brutality in
the face of the whole world. I ventured to remark that the Spanish
Princes at Valencey, and the Pope at Fontainebleau, had never
experienced such treatment. “Certainly not,” resumed he; “the Princes
hunted and gave balls at Valencey, without being physically aware of
their chains; they experienced respect and courtesy at all hands. Old
King Charles IV. removed from Compiegne to Marseilles, and from
Marseilles to Rome, whenever he wished. And yet how different are those
places from this! The Pope at Fontainebleau, whatever may have been the
reports circulated in the world, was treated in the same manner. And yet
how many persons, in spite of all the indulgences he enjoyed, refused to
be appointed to guard him!—a circumstance which gave me no offence, for
I thought it perfectly natural. Such employments are subject to the
influence of delicacy of feeling; and our European manners require that
power should be limited by honour.” He observed that, for his own part,
as a private man and an officer, he should without hesitation have
refused to guard the Pope, whose removal to France, he added, had never
been ordered by him.—I manifested great surprise.—“You are astonished,”
said he: “you did not know this? But it is nevertheless true, as well as
many other similar facts, which you will learn in course of time. But,
with reference to the subject on which we have just been speaking, it is
necessary to distinguish the conduct of the sovereign, who acts
collectively, from that of the private man, whose sentiments are without
constraint. Policy permits, nay, frequently demands, from the one, what
would be unpardonable in the other.” The hour of dinner, by introducing
various subjects of conversation, diverted his melancholy, and
cheerfulness finally prevailed.

Meanwhile the Emperor seriously determined to quit his present wretched
abode, whatever inconvenience his new residence might present. On going
to pass the remainder of the evening with our host, the Emperor directed
me to present him a box bearing his cypher, and to tell him he was sorry
for all the trouble he had occasioned to him.

ON THE NOUVELLE HÉLOÏSE, AND ON LOVE.

7th.—The Emperor summoned me to attend him at an early hour. He began to
read the Nouvelle Héloïse, frequently remarking on the ingenuity and
force of the arguments, the elegance of the style and expressions: he
read for upwards of two hours. This reading made a powerful impression
on me; it produced a deep melancholy—a mingled feeling of tenderness and
sorrow. I had always been fond of the work; and it now awakened happy
recollections, and excited deep regret: the Emperor frequently smiled at
me. During breakfast the Nouvelle Héloïse was the topic of conversation.

“Jean-Jacques has overcharged his subject,” said the Emperor; “he has
painted madness: love should be a source of pleasure, not of misery.” I
alleged that Jean-Jacques had described nothing which a man might not
feel, and that even the misery to which the Emperor alluded was, in
reality, happiness.—“I see,” said he, “you have a little touch of the
romantic: has Love’s misery rendered you happy?”—“I do not complain of
my fate, Sire,” replied I; “were I to begin life again, I should wish to
retrace the course I have already pursued.”

The Emperor resumed his reading after breakfast; but he paused
occasionally: the enchantment seemed to seize him in his turn. He at
length laid down the book, and we went out to the garden. “Really,” said
he, as we walked along, “this work is not without fire; it moves, it
rouses the feelings.” We discussed the subject deeply; we were very
prolix in our remarks, and we at length agreed that perfect love is like
ideal happiness; that both are equally airy, fugitive, mysterious, and
inexplicable; and that, finally, love is the business of the idle man,
the recreation of the warrior, and the ruin of the sovereign.

We were joined by the Grand Marshal and M. Gourgaud, who had just come
from Longwood. The admiral had for some days past been urgent for our
removal thither; and the Emperor was not less anxious to go, the
accommodation at Briars being so very bad. However, before he removed,
it was necessary that the smell of the paint should be entirely gone,
for, owing to his peculiar organization, he could not possibly endure
it. In the Imperial palaces, care had been taken never to expose him to
it. In his different journeys, the slightest smell of paint frequently
rendered it necessary to change the apartments that had been prepared
for him; and on board of the Northumberland the paint of the ship had
made him very ill. He had been informed on the preceding evening that
all was ready at Longwood, and that the disagreeable effect of the paint
was entirely gone. He accordingly determined to remove on the Saturday
following, as he would thus be rid of the annoyance of the workmen on
Sunday; but the Grand Marshal and M. Gourgaud now came to say that they
had visited the place, and that it was not habitable. The Emperor
expressed much vexation at the first account he had received, and the
resolution which it had led him to adopt. The two gentlemen withdrew,
and we entered the lower walk. The Emperor was much out of humour. M. de
Montholon now arrived, very _mal-a-propos_, from Longwood, declaring
that all was ready, and that the Emperor might remove as soon as he
wished. These two accounts, so contradictory and so close upon each
other, strongly excited his displeasure. Fortunately, dinner was
announced, which diverted his attention from the subject. The cloth was
laid in the Emperor’s chamber; for he had so severe a cold that he could
not endure the tent. After dinner he resumed his reading; and ended the
day, as he had begun it, with the Nouvelle Héloïse.

THE ENGLISH LIEUTENANT.—A SINGULAR CIRCUMSTANCE.—DEPARTURE FOR LONGWOOD
  DETERMINED ON.—STATE OF FRANCE.—MEMORIAL IN JUSTIFICATION OF NEY.

  8th—9th. Owing to the doubt which had yesterday arisen respecting the
  paint, I determined to go myself to ascertain the real state of the
  case, and to acquaint the Emperor with it at breakfast-time. I
  accordingly set out very early, walking three parts of the way,
  because nobody was up who could get ready a horse for me. I returned
  before nine o’clock. The smell of the paint was certainly very slight;
  but it was too much for the Emperor.

  On the 9th the Captain of the Minden of 74, was introduced to the
  Emperor in the garden. The captain had arrived from the Cape of Good
  Hope, and was on the eve of sailing for Europe. He had had the honour
  of being presented to Napoleon at Paris, under the Consulate, about
  twelve years before. He requested permission to introduce one of his
  Lieutenants to the Emperor, on account of some personal circumstances,
  which we thought very singular. The young man was born at Bologna,
  precisely at the period when the French army entered that city. The
  French General, Napoleon, had by some accident been present at the
  christening of the child, to whom he gave a tri-coloured cockade,
  which has since been carefully preserved in the family.

  After the departure of these gentlemen, the Grand Marshal arrived from
  Longwood. He thought the paint by no means offensive; the Emperor’s
  present accommodation was very bad, and a portion of his property had
  already been removed; he therefore resolved to proceed to Longwood on
  the following day, of which I was heartily glad. I had for some days
  past had an opportunity of observing that a determination had been
  adopted to compel the Emperor to quit his present abode. I had kept to
  myself all the communications, public or private, that had been made
  to me on the subject. I made it a rule to spare him every cause of
  vexation that I possibly could, and merely contented myself with
  acting in the way that I thought most advisable. Two days before, an
  officer was sent to carry away the tent, though we had expressed no
  wish to that effect. The officer had also been directed to remove the
  outside shutters from the Emperor’s windows; but this I opposed,
  telling him it could not be done, as the Emperor had not yet risen,
  and I sent him away. On another occasion, with the view of alarming
  me, I was told as a great secret that if the Emperor did not
  immediately remove, it was intended to station a hundred soldiers at
  the gates of the enclosure. “Very well,” I replied, and took no
  further notice. What could be the occasion of all this hurry? I
  suspect that the caprice of our jailors, and the desire of pushing
  their authority to the utmost, had more concern in the business than
  any thing else.

  We received newspapers down to the 15th of September; and they became
  the subject of conversation. The Emperor analyzed them. The future
  appeared enveloped in clouds. “However,” said the Emperor, “three
  great events present themselves to the imagination;—the division of
  France, the reign of the Bourbons, or a new dynasty. Louis XVIII.,”
  observed he, “might easily have reigned in 1814, by rendering himself
  a national monarch. Now he has only the odious and uncertain chance
  arising out of excessive severity—a reign of terror. His dynasty may
  be permanently established, or that which is to succeed him may still
  be in the secret of futurity.” Some one present observed, “that the
  Duke of Orleans might be called to the throne;” but the Emperor, by a
  string of very forcible and eloquent reasoning, proved that, unless
  the Duke of Orleans came to wear the crown in his turn by the natural
  order of succession, it was the well-understood interest of all the
  sovereigns of Europe to prefer him (Napoleon) to the Duke of Orleans,
  coming to the throne by a crime. “For,” said he, “what is the doctrine
  of Kings against the events of the present day? Is it to prevent a
  renewal of the example which I furnished, against what they call
  legitimacy? Now the example which I have set cannot be renewed above
  once in the course of many ages; but that of the Duke of Orleans, the
  near relative of the monarch on the throne, may be renewed daily,
  hourly, and in every country. There is no sovereign, who has not, in
  his own palace, and about his person, cousins, nephews, brothers, and
  other relations, who could easily follow such an example if it were
  once given.”

  We read, in the same papers, an abstract of the memorial, in
  justification of Marshal Ney.—The Emperor thought it most pitiable. It
  was not calculated to save his life, and by no means to maintain his
  honour. The arguments in his defence were, to say the least of them,
  feeble and destitute of point. After all he had done, he st¡ll
  protested his devotedness to the King, and his aversion of the
  Emperor, “An absurd plan,” said Napoleon, “but one which has been
  generally adopted by those who have figured in the present memorable
  times, and who seem not to have considered that I am so entirely
  identified with our prodigies, our monuments, our institutions, and
  all our national acts, that to separate me from them is to wrong
  France. The glory of France is to acknowledge me! And, in spite of all
  the subtlety, evasion, and falsehood, that may be employed to prove
  the contrary, my character will still be fairly estimated by the
  French nation. Ney’s defence,” continued he, “was plainly traced out.
  He was led on by a general impulse which he thought calculated to
  ensure the welfare of his country; he had obeyed without
  premeditation, and without any treasonable design. A change of fortune
  had ensued, and he was cited before a tribunal; this was all he had to
  say with respect to the great events that had taken place. As to the
  defence of his life, there was nothing to be said on that point,
  except, indeed, that he was protected by a solemn capitulation, which
  guaranteed to every individual silence and oblivion with regard to all
  political acts and opinions. Had he pursued that line of defence, and
  were his life, nevertheless, to be sacrificed, it would be, in the
  face of the whole world, a violation of the most sacred laws. He would
  leave behind him the recollection of a glorious character; carrying to
  the grave the sympathy of every generous mind, and heaping disgrace
  and reprobation on his murderers. But this enthusiasm is probably
  beyond his moral strength,” said the Emperor. “Ney is the bravest of
  men, and nothing more.”

  It is certain that when Ney quitted Paris, he was wholly devoted to
  the King; and that he did not turn until he saw that all was lost. If
  he then proved himself enthusiastic in the opposite course, it was
  because he felt that he had much to atone for. After his famous order
  of the day, he wrote to Napoleon that what he had done was principally
  with a view to the welfare of the country; and that, as he could not
  henceforth be agreeable to the Emperor, he begged that he would grant
  him permission to retire. The Emperor desired him to come, and said he
  would receive him as he did on the day after the battle of the
  Moscowa. Ney presented himself to Napoleon, and said that, after what
  had occurred at Fontainebleau, he must of necessity entertain doubts
  of his attachment and fidelity; and that therefore he solicited no
  other rank than that of a grenadier in the Imperial guard. The Emperor
  replied by stretching forth his hand to him, and calling him the
  bravest of the brave, as he was accustomed to do. The Emperor compared
  the situation of Ney to that of Turenne. Ney might be defended: but
  Turenne was unjustifiable. And yet Turenne was pardoned and loaded
  with honours, while Ney was probably doomed to die.

  “In 1649,” said he, “Turenne commanded the royal army, which command
  had been conferred on him by Anne of Austria, the Regent of the
  kingdom. Though he had taken the oath of fidelity, yet he bribed his
  troops, declared himself for the Fronde, and marched on Paris. But
  when he was declared guilty of high treason, his repentant army
  forsook him; and Turenne took refuge with the Prince of Hesse, to
  avoid the pursuit of justice. Ney, on the contrary, was urged by the
  unanimous wish and outcry of his army. Only nine months had elapsed
  since he had acknowledged a monarch, who had been preceded by six
  hundred thousand foreign bayonets: a monarch who had not accepted the
  constitution presented to him by the Senate, as the formal and
  necessary condition of his return, and who, by declaring that he had
  reigned nineteen years, proved that he regarded all preceding
  governments as usurpations. Ney, whose education had taught him to
  respect the national sovereignty, had fought for five-and-twenty years
  to support that cause; and, from a private soldier, had raised himself
  to the rank of marshal. If his conduct on the 20th of March was not
  honourable, it is at least explicable, and in some respects
  pardonable; but Turenne was absolutely criminal, because the Fronde
  was the ally of Spain, which was then at war with his Sovereign, and
  because he had been prompted by his own interest and that of his
  family, in the hope of obtaining a sovereignty at the expense of
  France, and consequently to the prejudice of his country.”




                       ESTABLISHMENT AT LONGWOOD.

                                -------

                    REMOVAL TO LONGWOOD.—DESCRIPTION
                  OF THE ROAD.—TAKING POSSESSION.—THE
                       EMPEROR’S FIRST BATH, &C.

  10th.—The Emperor ordered me to be called about nine o’clock, to
  accompany him into the garden. He was obliged to leave his chamber
  very early, as all the furniture was to be removed that morning to
  Longwood. On entering the garden, the Emperor sent for Mr. Balcombe,
  our host. He then ordered his breakfast, and invited Mr. Balcombe to
  breakfast with him. He was in charming spirits, and his conversation
  was very lively.

  About two o’clock the Admiral was announced: he advanced with an air
  of embarrassment. The manner in which the Emperor had been treated at
  Briars, and the restraints which had been imposed upon the members of
  his suite residing in the town, had occasioned a coolness between
  them. The Emperor had discontinued receiving the visits of the
  Admiral; yet, on the present occasion, he behaved to him as though
  they had met but yesterday.

  At length we left Briars, and set out for Longwood. The Emperor rode
  the horse which had been brought for him from the Cape. He had not
  seen him before: he was a small, sprightly, and tolerably handsome
  animal. The Emperor wore his uniform of the chasseurs of the guard:
  his graceful figure and handsome countenance were particularly
  remarkable. His appearance attracted general notice, and I was
  gratified to hear the observations which it called forth. The Admiral
  was very attentive to him. Many persons had collected on the road to
  see him pass. Several English officers, together with ourselves,
  formed his escort.

  The road from Briars to Longwood runs for some distance in the
  direction of the town. It then turns off suddenly to the right, and,
  after three or four windings, clears the chain of hills forming one
  side of the valley. The road next opens upon a level height of gentle
  acclivity, and a new horizon and new scenes present themselves. We now
  left behind us the chain of barren mountains and rocks which
  distinguish the landing-side of the island, and saw before us a
  transverse group of hills, of which Diana’s Peak is the highest, and
  appears like the key-stone, or the nucleus, of the surrounding scene.
  On the left, or eastern, side, where Longwood is situated, the horizon
  is bounded by the broken chain of rocks forming the outline and
  barrier of the island. There the soil exhibits an uncultivated desert;
  but on the right the eye rests on an extensive tract of country,
  which, though rugged, at least presents traces of vegetation: it is
  covered with numerous residences, and upon the whole is tolerably well
  cultivated. On this side, it must be confessed, the picture is
  romantic and pleasing.

  Here a deep valley opens on the left of the road, which is in very
  good condition; and two miles farther on, where the road makes an
  angle, stands Hut’s Gate, a wretched little house, which was selected
  as the residence of the Grand Marshal and his family. At a short
  distance from this point, the valley on the left, having gradually
  increased in depth, forms a circular gulf, which, from its vast depth
  and extent, has received the name of the Devil’s Punch-bowl. The road
  is here contracted by an eminence on the right, and it runs along the
  side of this precipice, until it turns off in the direction of
  Longwood, which is close at hand.

  At the entrance of Longwood, we found a guard under arms, who rendered
  the prescribed honours to the august captive. The Emperor’s horse,
  which was spirited and untractable, being unused to this kind of
  parade, was startled at the sound of the drum; he refused to pass the
  gate, and it was only by the help of the spur that his rider succeeded
  in forcing him to advance. At this moment, I observed very expressive
  looks exchanged among the persons composing the Emperor’s escort. We
  entered our new residence about four o’clock.

  The admiral took great pains to point out to us even the minutest
  details at Longwood. He had superintended all the arrangements, and
  some things were even the work of his own hands. The Emperor was
  satisfied with every thing, and the Admiral seemed highly pleased. He
  had evidently anticipated petulance and disdain; but the Emperor
  manifested perfect good-humour.

  He retired at six o’clock, and beckoned me to follow him to his
  chamber. Here he examined various articles of furniture, and enquired
  whether I was similarly provided. On my replying in the negative, he
  insisted on my accepting them; saying in the most engaging manner,
  “Take them; I shall want for nothing: I shall be taken better care of
  than you.” He felt much fatigued, and he asked whether he did not look
  so. This was the consequence of having passed five months in absolute
  inactivity. He had walked a good deal in the morning, besides riding
  some miles on horseback.

  Our new residence was provided with a bathing machine, which the
  Admiral had ordered the carpenters to fit up in the best way they
  could. The Emperor, who since he quitted Malmaison, had been obliged
  to dispense with the use of the bath, which to him had become one of
  the necessaries of life, expressed a wish to bathe immediately, and
  directed me to remain with him. The most trivial details of our new
  establishment came once more under consideration; and, as the
  apartment which had been assigned to me was very bad, the Emperor
  expressed a wish that, during the day, I should occupy what he called
  his topographic cabinet, which adjoined his own private closet, in
  order, as he said, that I might be nearer to him. I was much affected
  by the kind manner in which all this was spoken. He even went so far
  as to repeat to me several times that I must come next morning and
  take a bath in his machine; and when I excused myself on the ground of
  the respect and the distance which ought to be kept up between us, “My
  dear Las Cases,” said he, “fellow prisoners should accommodate each
  other. I do not want the bath all day, and it is not less necessary to
  you than to me.” One would have supposed that he wished to indemnify
  me for the loss that I was about to sustain, in being no longer the
  only individual about his person. This kindness delighted me, it is
  true; but it also produced a feeling of regret. The kindness of the
  Emperor was doubtless the reward of my assiduous attentions at Briars;
  but it also gave me cause to anticipate the close of that constant
  intercourse with him, for which I had been indebted to our profound
  solitude. The Emperor, not wishing to dress again, dined in his own
  room, and desired me to remain with him. We were alone, and our
  conversation turned on a subject of a peculiar nature, the result of
  which may be exceedingly important. He asked my opinion, and told me
  to communicate it to him next morning.

                        DESCRIPTION OF LONGWOOD.

  11th—14th. We now found unfolded to us a new portion of our existence
  on the wretched rock of St. Helena. We were settled in our new abode,
  and the limits of our prison were marked out.

  Longwood, which was originally merely a farm-house belonging to the
  East India Company, and which was afterwards given as a country
  residence to the Deputy Governor, is situated on one of the highest
  parts of the Island. The difference of the temperature between this
  place and the valley where we landed is marked by a variation of at
  least ten degrees of the English thermometer. Longwood stands on a
  level height, which is tolerably extensive on the eastern side, and
  pretty near the coast. Continual and frequently violent gales, always
  blowing in the same quarter, sweep the surface of the ground. The sun,
  though it rarely appears, nevertheless exercises its influence on the
  atmosphere, which is apt to produce disorders of the liver, if due
  precaution be not observed. Heavy and sudden falls of rain complete
  the impossibility of distinguishing any regular season. But there is
  no regular course of seasons at Longwood. The whole year presents a
  continuance of wind, clouds, and rain; and the temperature is of that
  mild and monotonous kind which, perhaps, after all, is rather
  conducive to _ennui_ than disease. Notwithstanding the abundant rains,
  the grass rapidly disappears, being either nipped by the wind or
  withered by the heat. The water, which is conveyed hither by a
  conduit, is so unwholesome that the Deputy Governor, when he lived at
  Longwood, never suffered it to be used in his family until it had been
  boiled; and we are obliged to do the same. The trees, which, at a
  distance, impart a smiling aspect to the scene, are merely gum trees—a
  wretched kind of shrub, affording no shade. On one side the horizon is
  bounded by the vast ocean; but the rest of the scene presents only a
  mass of huge barren rocks, deep gulfs, and desolate valleys; and, in
  the distance, appears the green and misty chain of mountains, above
  which towers Diana’s Peak. In short, Longwood can be pleasing only
  after the fatigues of a long voyage, when the sight of any land is a
  cheering prospect. Arriving at St. Helena on a fine day, the traveller
  may, perhaps, be struck with the singularity of the objects which
  suddenly present themselves, and exclaim “How beautiful!” but his
  visit is momentary; and what pain does not his hasty admiration cause
  to the unhappy captives who are doomed to pass their lives at St.
  Helena!

  Workmen had been constantly employed for two months in preparing
  Longwood for our reception; the result of their labours, however,
  amounted to little. The entrance to the house was by a room which had
  just been built, and which was intended to answer the double purpose
  of an ante-chamber and a dining room. This apartment led to another,
  which was made the drawing room; beyond this was a third room running
  in a cross direction and very dark. This was intended to be the
  depository of the Emperor’s maps and books; but it was afterwards
  converted into the dining room. The Emperor’s chamber opened into this
  apartment on the right-hand side. This chamber was divided into two
  equal parts, forming the Emperor’s cabinet and sleeping room: a little
  external gallery served for a bathing-room. Opposite to the Emperor’s
  chamber, at the other extremity of the building, were the apartments
  of Madame de Montholon, her husband, and her son, which have since
  been used as the Emperor’s library. Detached from this part of the
  house was a little square room on the ground floor contiguous to the
  kitchen, which was assigned to me. My son was obliged to enter his
  room through a trap-door and by the help of a ladder; it was nothing
  but a loft, and scarcely afforded room for his bed. Our windows and
  beds were without curtains. The few articles of furniture which were
  in our apartments had evidently been obtained from the inhabitants of
  the island, who doubtless readily seized the opportunity of disposing
  of them to advantage for the sake of supplying themselves with better.

[Illustration:

  RESIDENCE OF NAPOLEON AT LONGWOOD.

  London: Published for Henry Colburn, Feb. 1836.
]

  The Grand Marshal, with his wife and children, had been left at the
  distance of two miles behind us, in a place denominated Hut’s-Gate.
  General Gourgaud slept under a tent, as did also the Doctor,[27] and
  the officer commanding our guard, till such time as their apartments
  should be ready, which the crew of the Northumberland were rapidly
  preparing.

Footnote 27:

    Dr. O’Meara of the Northumberland.

  We were surrounded by a kind of garden; but, owing to the little
  attention which we had it in our power to bestow on its cultivation,
  joined to the want of water and the nature of the climate, it was a
  garden only in name. In front, and separated from us by a tolerably
  deep ravine, was encamped the fifty-third regiment, different parties
  of which were posted on the neighbouring heights.—Such was our new
  abode.

  On the 12th, Colonel Wilks (formerly Governor for the East India
  Company), who had been succeeded by the Admiral, came to visit the
  Emperor. I acted as interpreter on the occasion. On the 13th or 14th
  the Minden sailed for Europe, and I availed myself of the opportunity
  thus afforded to send letters to London and Paris.

ARRANGEMENT OF THE EMPEROR’S ESTABLISHMENT.—FEELINGS OF THE
  CAPTIVES WITH RESPECT TO EACH OTHER.—TRAITS OF THE EMPEROR’S
  CHARACTER.—PORTRAIT OF NAPOLEON BY M. DE PRADT, TRANSLATED FROM
  AN ENGLISH NEWSPAPER.—ITS REFUTATION.

  15th—16th. The domestic establishment of the Emperor, on his departure
  from Plymouth, consisted of twelve persons. I feel pleasure in
  recording their names here: it is a testimony due to their
  attachment.[28] However numerous this establishment may appear, it may
  be truly said that after our departure from England, during the
  voyage, and from the time of our landing at St. Helena, it had ceased
  to be serviceable to the Emperor. Our dispersion, the uncertainty of
  our establishment, our wants, and the irregular way in which they were
  supplied, necessarily created disorder.

Footnote 28:

                 Persons composing the Emperor’s household.

                        SERVANTS OF THE CHAMBER.

     Marchand,            native of Paris,     1st valet de
                                               chambre.

     St. Denis, called    native of            valet de chambre.
     Aly,                 Versailles,

     Noverraz,            Swiss,               ditto.

     Santini,             Corsican,            usher.

                          SERVANTS IN LIVERY.

     Archambault, sen.    native of            groom.
                          Fontainebleau,

     Archambault, jun.    ditto,               ditto.

     Gentilini,           native of Elba,      footman.

                        SERVANTS FOR THE TABLE.

     Cypriani,            Corsican, died at    maître d’hotel.
                          St. Helena,

     Pierron,             native of Paris,     butler.

     Lepage,                                   cook.

     Rousseau,            native of            steward.
                          Fontainebleau,

  As soon as we were all assembled at Longwood, the Emperor determined
  to arrange his establishment, and to assign to each of us an
  employment suited to our respective capacities. Reserving to the Grand
  Marshal the general control and superintendence of the whole
  household; he consigned to M. de Montholon all the domestic details.
  To M. Gourgaud he intrusted the direction of the stables: and I was
  appointed to take care of the property and furniture, and to
  superintend the management of our supplies. The latter part of my duty
  appeared to interfere too much with the regulation of domestic
  details. I conceived that it would be conducive to the general
  advantage, if these two departments were under the control of one
  individual, and I soon succeeded in accomplishing this object.

  Every thing now proceeded tolerably well, and we were certainly more
  comfortable than before. But, however reasonable might be the
  regulations made by the Emperor, they, nevertheless, sowed the seeds
  of discontent, which took root, and occasionally developed themselves.
  One thought himself a loser by the change; another sought to attach
  too high an importance to his office; and a third conceived that he
  had been wronged in the general division of duties. We were no longer
  the members of one family, each exerting his best endeavours to secure
  the advantage of the whole. We were far from putting into practice
  that which necessity seemed to dictate to us; and a wreck of luxury,
  or a remnant of ambition, frequently became an object of dispute.

  Though attachment to the person of the Emperor had united us around
  him, yet chance, and not sympathy, had brought us together. Our
  connexion was purely fortuitous, and not the result of any natural
  affinity. Thus, at Longwood, we were encircled round a centre, but
  without any cohesion with each other. How could it be otherwise? We
  were almost all strangers to one another, and, unfortunately, our
  different conditions, ages, and characters, were calculated to make us
  continue so.

  These circumstances, though in themselves trifling, had the vexatious
  effect of depriving us of our most agreeable resources. They banished
  that confidence, that interchange of sentiment, and that intimate
  union, which are calculated to soothe even the most cruel misfortunes.
  But, on the other hand, these very circumstances served to develope
  many excellent traits in the Emperor’s character. They were apparent
  in his endeavours to produce among us unity and conformity of
  sentiment; his constant care to remove every just cause of jealousy;
  the voluntary abstraction by which he averted his attention from that
  which he wished not to observe; and finally, the paternal expressions
  of displeasure, of which we were occasionally the objects, and which
  (to the honour of all be it said) were avoided as cautiously, and
  received as respectfully, as though they had emanated from the throne
  of the Tuileries.

  Who in the world can now pretend to know the Emperor in his character
  of a private man better than myself?—Who else was with him during two
  months of solitude in the desert of Briars?—Who else accompanied him
  in his long walks by moonlight, and enjoyed so many hours in his
  society? Who, like me, had the opportunity of choosing the moment, the
  place, and the subject of his conversation? Who, besides myself, heard
  him call to mind the charms of his boyhood, or describe the pleasures
  of his youth, and the bitterness of his recent sorrow? I am convinced
  that I know his character thoroughly, and that I can now explain many
  circumstances which, at the time of their occurrence, seemed to many
  difficult to be understood. I can now very well comprehend that which
  struck us so forcibly, and which particularly characterized him in the
  days of his power; namely, that no individual ever permanently
  incurred the displeasure of Napoleon: however marked might be his
  disgrace, however deep the gulf into which he was plunged, he might
  still confidently hope to be restored to favour. Those who had once
  enjoyed intimacy, whatever cause of offence they might give him, never
  totally forfeited his regard. The Emperor is eminently gifted with two
  excellent qualities;—a vast fund of justice, and a disposition
  naturally prone to attachment. Amidst all his vexations and fits of
  anger, a sentiment of justice still predominates. He is sure to turn
  an attentive ear to sound arguments, and, if left to himself, candidly
  brings them forward whenever they occur to his mind. He never forgets
  services performed for him, nor habits he has contracted. Sooner or
  later he invariably casts a thought on those who may have incurred his
  displeasure; he reflects on what they have suffered, considers their
  punishment as sufficient, recals them, when they are perhaps forgotten
  by the world; and they again enjoy his good graces, to the
  astonishment of themselves as well as of others. Of this there have
  been many instances. The Emperor is sincere in his attachments,
  without making a show of what he feels. When once he becomes used to a
  person, he cannot easily bear separation. He observes and condemns his
  faults, blames his own choice, expressing his displeasure in the most
  unreserved way; but still there is nothing to fear: these are but so
  many new ties of regard.

  It will probably be a matter of surprise that I should sketch the
  Emperor’s character in so simple a style. All that is usually written
  about him is so far fetched: it has been thought necessary to employ
  antitheses and brilliant colouring; to seek for effect, and to rack
  the imagination for high-flown phrases. For my own part, I merely
  describe what I see, and express what I feel. This reflection, by the
  by, comes _à propos_.

  The Emperor was to-day reading with me, in the English papers, a
  portrait of himself, drawn by the Archbishop of Malines, and worked up
  with innumerable witticisms, affected antitheses and contrasts. He
  desired the Grand Marshal to transcribe it word for word. The
  following are the principal points: “The mind of Napoleon,” says the
  Abbé de Pradt, in his _Embassy to Warsaw, in 1812_, “was vast; but
  after the manner of the Orientals: and through a contradictory
  disposition, it descended as it were, by the effect of its own weight,
  to details which might justly be called low. His first idea was always
  grand, and his second mean and petty. His mind was like his purse;
  munificence and meanness held each a string. His genius, which was at
  once adapted to the stage of the world, and the mountebank’s show,
  resembled a royal robe joined to a harlequin’s jacket. He was the man
  of extremes; one, who having commanded the Alps to bow down, the
  Simplon to smooth its ruggedness, and the sea to advance or recede
  from its shores, ended by surrendering himself to an English cruiser.
  Endowed with wonderful and infinite shrewdness; glittering with wit;
  seizing or creating, in every question, new and unperceived relations;
  abounding in lively and picturesque images, animated and pointed
  expressions, the more forcible from the very incorrectness of his
  language, which always bore a sort of foreign impress; sophistical,
  subtle, and changeable, to excess, he adopted different rules of
  optics from those by which other men are guided. Add to this the
  delirium of success, the habit of drinking from the enchanted cup, and
  intoxicating himself with the incense of the world: and you may form
  an idea of the man who, uniting in his caprices all that is lofty and
  mean in the human character, majestic in the splendour of sovereignty,
  and peremptory in command, with all that is ignoble and base, even in
  his grandest achievements, joining the treacherous ambush to the
  subversion of thrones—presents altogether such a Jupiter-Scapin, as
  never before figured on the scene of life.”

  Certainly here is abundance of wit, and of the most studied kind. I
  pass over the indecorous and disgraceful fact that a reverend prelate,
  an Archbishop loaded with the bounty of his sovereign, to whom, during
  his prosperity, he paid the most assiduous court, and offered the most
  abject flattery, should, in the adversity of that sovereign, indulge
  in language so trivial, grotesque, and insulting, as that above
  quoted. Without noticing the _harlequin’s coat_, and _Jupiter-Scapin_,
  I shall merely dwell on the merit of the Abbé de Pradt’s judgment,
  when he says that “the Emperor’s first idea is always grand, and his
  second petty; that he is the man of extremes: one who having commanded
  the Alps to bow down, the Simplon to smooth its ruggedness, and the
  sea to advance and recede from its shores, ended by surrendering
  himself to an English cruiser.” The Abbé de Pradt must have formed but
  a faint idea of the sublimity, grandeur, and magnanimity of that noble
  act. To withdraw himself from a people who were misled by faithless
  intriguers, in order to remove every obstacle to their welfare: to
  sacrifice his own personal interests, for the sake of averting the
  evils of a civil war without national results: to disdain honourable
  and secure, but dependent, asylums: to prefer taking refuge among a
  people to whom he had, for the space of twenty years, been an
  inveterate foe: to suppose their magnanimity equal to his own: to
  honour their laws so far as to believe that they would protect him
  from the ostracism of Europe:—certainly such ideas and sentiments are
  not the reverse of sublime, noble, and great.

  At this part of my journal were inserted several pages, full of
  details very discreditable to the Archbishop of Malines, which were
  received from the Emperor’s own mouth, or collected from the different
  individuals about him. I however strike them out, in consideration of
  the satisfaction which I was informed the Emperor subsequently
  experienced in perusing M. de Pradt’s _Concordats_. For my own part, I
  am perfectly satisfied with numerous other testimonies of the same
  nature, and derived from the same source. An honourable and voluntary
  acknowledgment is a thousand times better than all the retorts that
  can be heaped upon an offender. There are persons to whom atonement is
  not without its due weight; I am one of these.

  Just as I had written the above, I happened to read some lines from
  the pen of the Abbé de Pradt, which are certainly very fine with
  respect to diction; but which are still finer on account of their
  justice and truth. I cannot refrain from transcribing them here; as
  they make ample amends for those already quoted. A declaration of the
  Allied Sovereigns at Laybach, in which Napoleon was, in terms of
  reprobation, pronounced to be the representative of the Revolution,
  called forth the following observations from the Archbishop of
  Malines:—

  “It is too late to insult Napoleon, now that he is defenceless, after
  having for so many years crouched at his feet, while he had the power
  to punish.... Those who are armed should respect a disarmed enemy, and
  the glory of the conqueror depends in a great measure on the
  consideration shewn towards the captive, particularly when he yields
  to superior force, not to superior genius. It is too late to call
  Napoleon a revolutionist, after having for such a length of time
  pronounced him to be the restorer of order in France, and, through
  France, in Europe. It is too late for those to aim the shaft of insult
  at him who once stretched forth their hands to him as a friend,
  pledged their faith to him as an ally, and sought to prop a tottering
  throne by mingling their blood with his.” Farther on he says: “_He the
  representative of the revolution!_ The revolution broke the bonds of
  union between France and Rome: he renewed them. The revolution
  overthrew the temples of the Almighty: he restored them. The
  revolution created two classes of clergy hostile to each other: he
  reconciled them. The revolution profaned St. Denis: he purified it,
  and offered expiation to the ashes of Kings. The revolution subverted
  the throne: he raised it up, and gave it a new lustre. The revolution
  banished from their country the nobility of France: he opened to them
  the gates of France and of his palace, though he knew them to be his
  irreconcileable enemies, and for the most part the enemies of the
  public institutions; he reincorporated them with the society from
  which they had been separated. This _representative of a revolution_,
  which is distinguished by the epithet anti-social, brought from Rome
  the head of the Catholic Church, to anoint his brow with the oil that
  consecrates diadems! This _representative of a revolution_, which has
  been declared hostile to sovereignty, filled Germany with kings,
  advanced the rank of princes, restored superior royalty, and
  re-constructed a defaced model. This _representative of a revolution_
  which is condemned as a principle of anarchy, like another Justinian,
  drew up, amidst the din of war and the snares of foreign policy, those
  codes which are the least defective portion of human legislature, and
  constructed the most vigorous machine of government in the whole
  world. This _representative of a revolution_, which is vulgarly
  accused of having subverted all institutions, restored universities
  and public schools, filled his empire with the masterpieces of art,
  and accomplished those amazing and stupendous works which reflect
  honour on human genius: and yet, in the face of the Alps, which bowed
  down at his command; of the ocean, subdued at Cherbourg, at Flushing,
  at the Helder, and at Antwerp; of rivers, smoothly flowing beneath the
  bridges of Jena, Serres, Bourdeaux, and Turin; of canals, uniting seas
  together in a course beyond the control of Neptune; finally, in the
  face of Paris, metamorphosed as it is by Napoleon,—he is pronounced to
  be the agent of general destruction! He who restored all, is said to
  be the _representative_ of that which destroyed all! To what
  undiscerning men is this language supposed to be addressed? &c.”

                  MY SITUATION MATERIALLY IMPROVED.—MY
                        BED-CHAMBER CHANGED, &C.

  17th.—The Emperor summoned me at two o’clock, when he began to dress.
  On entering, he observed that I looked pale: I replied that it might
  be owing to the atmosphere of my chamber, which, from its proximity to
  the kitchen, was an absolute oven, being frequently filled with smoke.
  He then expressed a wish that I should constantly occupy the
  topographic cabinet, in which I might write during the day, and sleep
  at night, in a bed which the Admiral had fitted up for the Emperor
  himself, but which he did not make use of as he preferred his own
  camp-bed. When he had finished dressing, and was choosing between two
  or three snuff-boxes, which lay before him, he abruptly gave one to
  his valet-de-chambre (Marchand): “Put that by,” said he, “it is always
  meeting my eye, and it pains me.” I know not what was on this
  snuff-box; but I imagine it was a portrait of the King of Rome.

  The Emperor left his apartment, and I followed him; he went over the
  house, and entered my chamber. Seeing a dressing-glass, he inquired
  whether it was the one that he had given me. Then putting his hand to
  the wall, which was heated by the kitchen, he again observed that I
  could not possibly remain in that room, and absolutely insisted on my
  occupying his bed in the topographic cabinet: adding, in a tone of
  captivating kindness, that it was “the bed of a friend.” We walked
  out, and proceeded towards a wretched farm which was within sight. On
  our way we saw the barracks of the Chinese. These Chinese are
  labouring men, who enlist on board English ships at Macao, and who
  continue at St. Helena in the service of the East India Company for a
  certain number of years, when they return to their homes, after
  collecting a little store of money, as the people of Auvergne do in
  France. The Emperor wished to ask them some questions: but we could
  not make ourselves understood by them. We next visited what is called
  Longwood Farm, The Emperor was seduced by the name; he expected to
  find one of the delightful farms of Flanders or England; but this was
  merely on a level with our lowest _metairies_. We afterwards went down
  to the Company’s garden, which is formed in the hollow where the two
  opposite ravines meet. The Emperor called the gardener, and the man
  who attends to the Company’s cattle and superintends the Chinese, of
  whom he asked many questions. He returned home very much fatigued,
  though we had scarcely walked a mile: this was his first excursion.

  Before dinner the Emperor summoned me and my son to our accustomed
  task. He said that I had been idle, and called my attention to my son,
  who was laughing behind my back. He asked why he laughed; and I
  replied that it was probably because his Majesty was taking revenge
  for him. “Ah!” said he, smiling, “I see I am acting the part of the
  grandfather here.”

HABITS AND HOURS OF THE EMPEROR.—HIS STYLE TO THE TWO
  EMPRESSES.—DETAILS.—THE EMPEROR’S MAXIMS ON THE SUBJECT OF THE
  POLICE.—SECRET POLICE FOR THE EXAMINATION OF LETTERS.—CURIOUS
  PARTICULARS.—THE EMPEROR FAVOURABLE TO A FIXED AND MODERATE SYSTEM OF
  GOVERNMENT.

  18th—19th. By degrees our hours and habits began to be fixed and
  regular. About ten o’clock the Emperor breakfasted in his own chamber,
  and one of us occasionally attended him. At the table of the household
  we breakfasted at nearly the same hour. The Emperor granted us
  permission to do the honours of this table as we pleased, and to
  invite to it whomsoever we might think fit.

  No hours were yet fixed for the Emperor’s walks. The heat was very
  great during the day, and the damp came on speedily and profusely
  towards evening. We were informed, some time before, that coach and
  saddle horses were coming from the Cape; but they never arrived.
  During the day the Emperor was engaged in dictating to the different
  persons of his suite; and he usually reserved me for the interval
  preceding dinner, which was not served until eight or nine o’clock. He
  required my attendance about five or six o'clock, together with my
  son. I could neither write nor read, owing to the state of my eyes;
  but my son was enabled to supply my place. He wrote to the Emperor’s
  dictation, and I was present only to help him afterwards to correct
  his hasty scrawl; for, by dint of habit, I could repeat, almost
  literally and entirely, all that had fallen from the Emperor.

  The Campaign of Italy being now finished, we began to revise it, and
  the Emperor corrected, and dictated anew. We dined, as I have before
  observed, between eight and nine o’clock. The table was laid out in
  the room nearest to the entrance of the house. Madame de Montholon sat
  on the right of the Emperor; I on his left; and Messrs. de Montholon,
  Gourgaud, and my son, sat in the opposite places. The room still
  smelled of paint, particularly when the weather was damp; and though
  not very offensive, it was sufficiently annoying to the Emperor: we,
  therefore, sat no longer than ten minutes at table. The dessert was
  prepared in the adjoining apartment, which was the drawing-room, and
  we again seated ourselves round the table. Coffee was then served up,
  and conversation commenced. We read a few scenes from Moliere, Racine,
  and Voltaire, and always regretted not having a copy of Corneille. We
  then played at _reversis_, which had been the Emperor’s favourite game
  in his youth. The recollection was pleasing to him, and he at first
  thought that he could amuse himself for a length of time at it; but he
  was soon undeceived. We played at the game and all its varieties;
  which made it so complex that I have seen from fifteen to eighteen
  thousand counters in use at once. The Emperor’s aim was always to make
  the reversis; that is to say, to make every trick, which is no easy
  matter. However, he frequently succeeded:—character developes itself
  every where and in every thing. We retired about ten or eleven
  o’clock.

  To-day, the 19th, when I paid my respects to the Emperor, he shewed me
  a libel upon himself which had fallen into his hands, and asked me to
  translate it. Amidst a mass of other nonsense, some private letters
  were mentioned, which were said to have been addressed by Napoleon to
  the Empress Josephine, under the solemn form of _Madame et chère
  Epouse_. Allusion was next made to a combination of spies and agents,
  by whose aid the Emperor knew the private affairs of every family in
  France, and penetrated the secrets of all the cabinets in Europe. The
  Emperor wished to proceed no farther, and made me lay aside the book,
  saying,—“It is too absurd.” The fact is that, in his private
  correspondence, Napoleon always addressed the Empress Josephine very
  unfashionably by the pronoun “thou” (_tu_); and “my good little
  Louisa” (_ma bonne petite Louise_) was the form by which he addressed
  Maria Louisa.

  The first time I ever saw the Emperor’s running-hand was at
  Saint-Cloud, after the battle of Friedland, when the Empress Josephine
  amused herself by making us try to decipher a note which she held in
  her hand, and which seemed to be written in hieroglyphics. It was to
  the following effect:—“My sons have once more shed a lustre over my
  career: the victory of Friedland will be inscribed in history, beside
  those of Marengo, Austerlitz, and Jena. You will cause the cannon to
  be fired; Cambaceres will publish the bulletin.”

  I was again favoured with the sight of a note in the Emperor’s
  hand-writing, at the time of the treaty of Tilsit. It contained the
  following:—“The Queen of Prussia is really a charming woman. She is
  fond of coquetting with me; but do not be jealous: I am like a
  cerecloth, along which every thing of this sort slides, without
  penetrating. It would cost me too dear to play the gallant.”

  On this subject, an anecdote was related in the saloon of Josephine.
  It was said that the Queen of Prussia one day had a beautiful rose in
  her hand, which the Emperor asked her to give to him. The Queen
  hesitated for a few moments, and then presented it to him, saying:
  “Why should I so readily grant what you request, while you remain deaf
  to all my entreaties?” She alluded to the fortress of Magdeburg, which
  she had earnestly solicited him to give up. Such was the nature of the
  intimacy, and such the conversations, that were so unblushingly
  misrepresented in English works of a certain degree of merit, where
  the Emperor was described as an insolent and brutal tyrant, seeking,
  with the aid of his ferocious Mamelukes, to violate the honour of the
  lovely Queen, before the very face of her unfortunate husband.

  As to the grand machinery of spies and police, which has been so much
  talked of, what state on the Continent could boast of having less of
  such evils than France; and yet what country stood more in need of
  them? What circumstances more imperatively called for them? Every
  pamphlet published in Europe was directed against France, with a view
  of rendering odious in another country that which it was thought
  advisable to conceal at home. Still, however, these measures, so
  necessary in principle, though doubtless hateful in their details,
  were looked at merely in a general way by the Emperor, and always with
  a strict observance of his constant maxim, that nothing should be done
  that is not absolutely indispensable. In the Council of State, I have
  frequently heard him make enquiries into these subjects; investigate
  them with peculiar solicitude; correct abuses and seek to obviate
  evils, and appoint committees of his Council to visit the prisons, and
  make reports to him. Having been myself employed in a mission of this
  nature, I had an opportunity of observing the misconduct and abuses of
  subaltern agents; and, at the same time, of knowing the ardent wishes
  of the sovereign to repress them.

  The Emperor found that this branch of the administration in a certain
  degree clashed with established prejudices and opinions; and he
  therefore wished to elevate it in the eyes of the people, by placing
  it under the control of a man whose character was beyond the reach of
  censure. In the year 1810, he summoned the Councillor of State, Baron
  ——, to Fontainebleau. The Baron had been an emigrant, or what nearly
  amounted to the same thing. His family, his early education, his
  former opinions,—all were calculated to render him an object of
  suspicion to one more distrustful than Napoleon. In the course of
  conversation, the Emperor said:—“If the Count de Lille were now to
  discover himself in Paris, and you were intrusted with the
  superintendence of the police, would you arrest him?”—“Yes,
  certainly,” answered the Councillor of State, “because he would
  thereby have broken his ban, and because his appearance would be in
  opposition to every existing law.”—“If you were one of a committee
  appointed to try him, would you condemn him?”—“Yes, doubtless; for the
  laws which I have sworn to obey would require that I should condemn
  him.”—“Very well!” said the Emperor, “return to Paris: I make you my
  prefect of police.”

  With regard to the inspection of letters under the government of
  Napoleon, whatever may have been publicly said on that subject, the
  Emperor declared that certainly very few letters were read at the
  post-offices. Those which were delivered either open or re-sealed, to
  private persons, had, for the most part, not been read: to read all
  would have been an endless task. The system of examining letters was
  adopted with the view of preventing, rather than discovering,
  dangerous correspondence. The letters that were really read exhibited
  no trace of having been opened, so effectual were the precautions
  employed. “Ever since the reign of Louis XIV.,” said the Emperor,
  “there had existed an office of political police for discovering
  foreign correspondence: and from that period the same families had
  managed the business of the office, though the individuals and their
  functions were alike unknown. It was in all respects an official post.
  The persons superintending this department were educated at great
  expense in the different capitals of Europe. They had their own
  peculiar notions of propriety, and always manifested reluctance to
  examine the home correspondence: it was, however, also under their
  control. As soon as the name of any individual was entered upon the
  lists of this important department, his arms and seals were
  immediately engraved at the office; and thus his letters, after having
  been read, were closed up and delivered without any mark of suspicion.
  These circumstances, joined to the serious evils which they might
  create, and the important results which they were capable of
  producing, constituted the vast responsibility of the office of
  postmaster-general, and required that it should be filled by a man of
  prudence, judgment, and intelligence.” The Emperor bestowed great
  praise on M. de Lavalette, for the way in which he had discharged his
  duties.

  The Emperor was by no means favourable to the system of inspecting
  correspondence. With regard to the diplomatic information thereby
  obtained, he did not consider it of sufficient value to counterbalance
  the expenses incurred; for the establishment cost 600,000 francs. As
  to the examination of the letters of citizens, he regarded that as a
  measure calculated to do more harm than good. “It is rarely,” said he,
  “that conspiracy is carried on through such channels; and with respect
  to the individual opinions obtained from epistolary correspondence,
  they may be more dangerous than useful to a sovereign, particularly
  among such a people as the French. Of whom will not our national
  volatility and fickleness lead us to complain? The man whom I may have
  offended at my levee will write to-day that I am a tyrant, though but
  yesterday he overwhelmed me with praises, and perhaps to-morrow will
  be ready to lay down his life to serve me. The violation of the
  privacy of correspondence may, therefore, cause a prince to lose his
  best friends, by wrongfully inspiring him with distrust and prejudice
  towards all; particularly as enemies capable of mischief are always
  sufficiently artful to avoid exposing themselves to that kind of
  danger. Some of my ministers were so cautious, in this respect, that I
  could never succeed in detecting one of their letters.”

  I think I have already mentioned that, on the Emperor’s return from
  Elba, there were found in M. De Blacas’ apartments in the Tuileries,
  numerous petitions and letters, in which Napoleon was spoken of most
  indecorously. He caused them to be burnt. “They would have formed a
  most odious collection,” said the Emperor. “For a moment I entertained
  the idea of inserting some of them in the Moniteur. They would have
  disgraced certain individuals; but they would have afforded no new
  lesson on the human heart: men are always the same!”

  The Emperor was far from knowing all the measures taken by the police
  in his name, with respect to writings and individuals; he had neither
  time nor opportunity to enquire into them. He now daily learns from
  us, or from pamphlets that happen to fall in his way, the arrests of
  individuals, or the suppression of works, of which he had never before
  heard.

  In alluding to the works that had been suppressed by the police during
  his reign, the Emperor observed that, having plenty of leisure-time
  during his residence at Elba, he amused himself with glancing over
  some of these works, and that he was frequently unable to conceive the
  motives which had induced the police to suppress them.

  He then proceeded to converse on the subject of the liberty and
  restriction of the press. This, he said, was an interminable question,
  and admitted of no medium. The grand difficulty, he observed, did not
  lie in the principle itself, but in the treatment of the accused
  party, or the circumstances under which it might be necessary to apply
  the principle taken in an abstract sense. The Emperor would have been
  favourable to unlimited liberty. In all our conversations at St.
  Helena, he constantly treated every great question in the same point
  of view and with the same arguments. Thus Napoleon truly was, and must
  remain in the eyes of posterity, the type, the standard, and the
  prince of liberal opinions; they belonged to his heart, to his
  principles, and to his mind. If his actions sometimes seemed to be at
  variance with these ideas, it was when he was imperatively swayed by
  circumstances. This is proved by the following fact, to which I now
  attach more importance than I did when it first came to my knowledge.

  In one of the evening-parties at the Tuileries, Napoleon, conversing
  aside with three or four individuals of the Court, who were grouped
  around him, closed a discussion on a great political question with the
  following remarkable words:—“For my part, I am fundamentally and
  naturally favourable to a fixed and moderate government.” And,
  observing that the countenance of one of the interlocutors expressed
  surprise, “You don’t believe me!” continued he; “why not? Is it
  because my deeds do not seem to accord with my words? My dear sir, how
  little you know of men and things! Is the necessity of the moment
  nothing in your eyes? Were I to slacken the reins only for a moment,
  we should have fine disorder; neither you nor I would probably sleep
  another night at the Tuileries.”

THE EMPEROR’S FIRST RIDE ON HORSEBACK.—SEVERITY OF THE MINISTERIAL
  INSTRUCTIONS.—OUR VEXATIONS AND COMPLAINTS.—THE EMPEROR’S
  REMARKS.—RUDE REPLIES.

  20th-23rd. The Emperor mounted his horse after breakfast. We directed
  our course towards the farm: we found the farmer in the Company’s
  garden, and he attended us over the whole of the grounds. The Emperor
  asked him a number of questions respecting his farm, as he used to do
  during his hunting-excursions in the neighbourhood of Versailles,
  where he discussed with the farmers the opinions of the Council of
  State, in order to bring forward to the Council in their turn the
  objections of the farmers. We advanced through the grounds of
  Longwood, in a line parallel with the valley, until, finding no
  farther road for the horses, we were compelled to turn back. We then
  crossed the little valley, gained the height where the troops were
  encamped, advanced to the Alarm Hill, and passing over its summit, we
  arrived beyond the camp, near the Alarm House, on the road leading
  from Longwood to Madame Bertrand’s residence. The Emperor at first
  proposed calling on her; but, when about half-way thither, he changed
  his mind, and we returned to Longwood.

  The instructions of the English Ministers, with regard to the Emperor
  at St. Helena, were dictated in that disgraceful spirit of harshness
  which in Europe had urged the solemn violation of the law of nations.
  An English officer was to be constantly at the Emperor’s table; this
  cruel measure was of course calculated to deprive us of the comforts
  of familiar intercourse. The order was not carried into effect, only
  because the Emperor, had it been enforced, would have taken his meals
  in his own chamber. I have very good reason to believe that he
  regretted not having done so on board the Northumberland. An English
  officer was to accompany the Emperor in his rides on horseback: this
  was a severe annoyance, which rendered it impossible that his mind
  could for a moment be diverted from his unfortunate situation. This
  order was not, however, enforced within certain limits, which were
  prescribed to us, because the Emperor had declared that he would not
  ride on horseback at all on such conditions.

  In our melancholy situation, every day brought with it some new cause
  of uneasiness; we were constantly suffering some new sting, which
  seemed the more cruel as we were destined to endure it for a long time
  to come. Lacerated as our feelings undoubtedly were, each fresh wound
  was sensibly felt; and the motives that were assigned for our
  vexations frequently assumed the appearance of irony. Thus sentinels
  were posted beneath the Emperor’s windows, and before our doors; and
  this we were informed was for our safety. We were impeded in our
  communications with the inhabitants of the island; we were put under a
  kind of close confinement; and were told that this was done to free
  the Emperor from all annoyance. The pass-words and orders were
  incessantly changed; we lived in the continual perplexity and
  apprehension of being exposed to some unforeseen insult. The Emperor,
  whose feelings were keenly alive to all these things, resolved to
  write to the Admiral, through the medium of M. de Montholon. He spoke
  with warmth, and made some observations worthy of remark. “Let not the
  Admiral suppose,” said he, “that I shall treat with him on any of
  these subjects. Were he to present himself to me to-morrow, in spite
  of my just resentment, he would find my countenance as serene, and my
  temper as composed, as usual. This would not be the effect of
  dissimulation on my part, but merely the fruit of experience. I
  recollect that Lord Whitworth once filled Europe with the report of a
  long conversation that he had had with me, scarcely a word of which
  was true. But that was my fault; and it taught me to be more cautious
  in future. The Emperor has governed too long not to know that he must
  not commit himself to the discretion of any one who may have it in his
  power to say falsely: _The Emperor told me so and so_; while the
  Emperor may not have the means of either affirming or contradicting
  the statement.

  “One witness is as good as another. It is, therefore, necessary to
  employ some one who may be enabled to tell the narrator that, in
  attributing such and such words to the Emperor, he lies, and that he
  is ready to give him satisfaction for this expression, which the
  Emperor himself cannot do.”

  M. de Montholon’s letter was couched in sharp terms; the reply was
  insulting and coarse: “_No such thing as an Emperor was known at St.
  Helena; the justice and moderation of the English government towards
  us would be the admiration of future ages, &c._” Dr. O’Meara was
  instructed to accompany this written reply with verbal additions of
  the most offensive nature: to enquire, for example, whether the
  Emperor wished that the Admiral should send him sundry atrocious
  libels and anonymous letters which had been received, addressed to
  him, &c.

  I was engaged with the Emperor at the time this answer was
  communicated to him. I could not conceal my astonishment and
  indignation at certain expressions that were employed. But we could
  only let philosophy take place of resentment: it was sufficient to
  reflect that all satisfaction was beyond our reach. To address a
  direct complaint to the Prince Regent would perhaps have been to
  furnish a gratification to that prince; as well as a recommendation to
  him who had offended us. Besides, the Emperor could not address
  complaints to any individual on earth: he could appeal only to the
  tribunals of Heaven, nations, and posterity.

  On the 23rd the Doris frigate arrived from the Cape, bringing seven
  horses that had been purchased there for the Emperor.

THE EMPEROR’S DISDAIN OF POPULARITY; HIS REASONS, ARGUMENTS,
  &C.—CONVERSATION RESPECTING MY WIFE.—ON GENERAL GOURGAUD’S MOTHER AND
  SISTER.

  24th.—The Emperor had been reading some publication in which he was
  made to speak in too amiable a strain; and he could not help
  exclaiming against the mistake of the writer. “How could they put
  these words into my mouth?” said he. “This is too tender, too
  sentimental, for me: every one knows that I do not express myself in
  that way.” “Sire,” I replied, “it was done with a good intention; the
  thing is innocent in itself, and may have produced a good effect. That
  reputation for amiableness, which you seem to despise, might have
  exercised great influence over public opinion; it might at least have
  counteracted the effect of the colouring in which a certain European
  system has falsely exhibited your Majesty to the world. Your heart,
  with which I am now acquainted, is certainly as good as that of Henri
  IV., which I did not know. Now, his amiableness of character is still
  proverbial: he is still held up as an idol; yet I suspect Henri IV.
  was a bit of a quack. And why should your Majesty have disdained to be
  so? You have too great an aversion to that system. After all, quackery
  rules the world; and it is fortunate when it happens to be only
  innocent.”

  The Emperor laughed at what he termed my prosing. “What,” said he, ”is
  the advantage of popularity and amiableness of character? Who
  possessed those qualities in a more eminent degree than the
  unfortunate Louis XVI.? Yet what was his fate? His life was
  sacrificed!—No! a sovereign must serve his people with dignity, and
  not make it his chief study to please them. The best mode of winning
  their love is to secure their welfare. Nothing is more dangerous than
  for a sovereign to flatter his subjects: if they do not afterwards
  obtain every thing they want they become irritated, and fancy that
  promises have been broken; and if they are then resisted, their hatred
  increases in proportion as they consider themselves deceived. A
  sovereign’s first duty is doubtless to conform with the wishes of the
  people; but what the people say is scarcely ever what they wish: their
  desires and their wants cannot be learned from their own mouths so
  well as they are to be read in the heart of their prince.

  “Each system may, no doubt, be maintained: that of mildness as well as
  that of severity. Each has its advantages and its disadvantages; for
  every thing is mutually balanced in this world. If you ask me what was
  the use of my severe forms and expressions, I shall answer, to spare
  me the pain of inflicting the punishment I threatened. What harm have
  I done after all? What blood have I shed? Who can boast that, had he
  been placed in my situation, he could have done better? What period of
  history, exhibiting any thing like the difficulties with which I was
  surrounded, presents such harmless results? What am I reproached with?
  My government archives and my private papers were seized; yet what has
  there been found to publish to the world? All sovereigns, situated as
  I was, amidst factions, disorders, and conspiracies, are surrounded by
  murders and executions! Yet, during my reign, what sudden tranquillity
  pervaded France!—You are, no doubt, astonished at this chain of
  reflection,” continued he, smiling, “you, who frequently display the
  mildness and simplicity of a child.”

  I could not but admit the force of his arguments, and now, in my turn,
  maintained that both systems might have their peculiar advantages.
  “Every individual,” said I, “should form a character for himself by
  means of education; but he should be careful, at the same time, to lay
  its foundation on the character he has received from Nature; otherwise
  he runs a risk of losing the advantages of the latter, without
  obtaining those of the character which he wishes to acquire; and his
  education may prove an instrument to mislead him. After all, the
  course of a man’s life is the true result of his character, and the
  proper test by which it should be judged. Of what, then, can I have to
  complain? From the lowest degree of misery, I raised myself, by my own
  efforts, to tolerable independence; and from the streets of London, I
  penetrated to the steps of your throne, and to the benches of your
  Council-chamber; all this, too, without having cause to blush in the
  presence of any individual for any thing that I have ever spoken,
  written, or done. Have I not then also performed my little wonders in
  my own little way? What could I have done better had another turn been
  given to my character?”

  The conversation was here interrupted by some one entering, to
  announce that the Admiral and some ladies, who had arrived by the
  Doris, solicited the favour of being presented to the Emperor; but he
  answered drily, that he would see no one, and that he did not wish to
  be disturbed.

  Under our present circumstances, the personal politeness of the
  Admiral was felt only as an additional insult: and with regard to
  those who accompanied him, as no one could approach us but with the
  Admiral’s permission, the Emperor did not choose that the honours of
  his person should be thus performed. If it were intended that he
  should remain in close confinement, he ought to be told so; but, if
  not, he should be allowed to see whom he pleased without the
  interference of any person. Above all, it was not fair that they
  should pretend in Europe to surround him with every sort of attention
  and respect, while, on the contrary, they were annoying him with every
  kind of indecorum and caprice.

  The Emperor walked out in the garden at five o’clock. The Colonel of
  the 53rd regiment waited on him there, and begged permission to
  present to him, next day, the officers of his regiment. The Emperor
  granted his request, and appointed three o’clock as the hour to
  receive them. The Colonel took his leave, and we prolonged our walk.
  The Emperor stopped awhile to look at a flower in one of the beds, and
  asked me whether it was not a lily. It was indeed a magnificent one.

  After dinner, while we were playing our usual game of _reversis_, of
  which, by the by, the Emperor began to grow weary, he suddenly turned
  to me and said, “Where do you suppose Madame Las Cases is at this
  moment?”—“Alas, Sire,” I replied, “Heaven knows!”—“She is in Paris,”
  continued he; “to-day is Tuesday; it is nine o’clock; she is now at
  the Opera.”—“No, Sire, she is too good a wife to go to the theatre
  while I am here.”—“Spoken like a true husband,” said the Emperor,
  laughing, “ever confident and credulous!” Then turning to General
  Gourgaud, he rallied him in the same style with respect to his mother
  and sister. Gourgaud seemed very much downcast, and his eyes were
  suffused with tears, which the Emperor perceiving, cast a side-glance
  towards him, and said, in the most interesting manner, “How wicked,
  barbarous and tyrannical I must be thus to trifle with feelings so
  tender!”[29]

Footnote 29:

    General Gourgaud entertained the greatest affection for his mother
    and sister, and was equally beloved by them. To such a length did he
    carry his regard for them that in his letters he even described St.
    Helena as a delightful place, in order to ease their anxiety on his
    account. In his letters he talked of nothing but groves of orange
    and lemon-trees, and perpetual Spring; in short, every thing that a
    romantic imagination could suggest. The English Ministers, however,
    blushed not, subsequently, to turn against him these innocent
    misrepresentations, the offspring of his filial solicitude!

  The Emperor then asked me how many children I had, and when and how I
  had become acquainted with Madame Las Cases. I replied that my wife
  had been the first acquaintance of my life; that our marriage was a
  tie which we had ourselves formed in early youth, yet that it had
  required the occurrence of the greater part of the events of the
  Revolution to bring about its accomplishment.

  THE EMPEROR FREQUENTLY WOUNDED IN HIS CAMPAIGNS.—COSSACKS.—JERUSALEM
                               DELIVERED.

  25th.—The Emperor, who had not been well the preceding evening, was
  still indisposed this morning, and sent word that it would be
  impossible for him to receive the officers of the 53rd, as he had
  appointed. He sent for me about the middle of the day, and we again
  perused some chapters of the Campaign of Italy. I compared that which
  treats of the battle of Arcole to a book of the Iliad.

  Some time before the dinner-hour, he assembled us all around him in
  his chamber. A servant entered to announce that dinner was ready; he
  sent us away, but, as I was going out last, he called me back. “Stay
  here,” said he, “we will dine together. Let the young people go; we
  old folks will keep one another company.” He then determined to dress,
  intending, as he said, to go into the drawing-room after dinner.

  While he was dressing, he put his hand on his left thigh, where there
  was a deep scar. He called my attention to it by laying his finger in
  it; and, finding that I did not understand what it was, he told me
  that it was the mark of a bayonet wound by which he had nearly lost
  his limb, at the siege of Toulon. Marchand, who was dressing him, here
  took the liberty of remarking that the circumstance was well known on
  board the Northumberland; that one of the crew had told him, on going
  on board, that it was an Englishman who first wounded our Emperor.

  The Emperor, on this, observed that people had in general wondered and
  talked a great deal of the singular good fortune which had preserved
  him, as it were, invulnerable in so many battles. “They were
  mistaken,” added he; “the only reason was that I always made a secret
  of all my dangers.” He then related that he had had three horses
  killed under him at the siege of Toulon; several others killed and
  wounded in his campaigns of Italy; and three or four at the siege of
  St. Jean-d’Acre. He added that he had been wounded several times;
  that, at the battle of Ratisbon, a ball had struck his heel; and at
  the battle of Esling, or Wagram, I cannot say which, another had torn
  his boot and stocking, and grazed the skin of his left leg. In 1814,
  he lost a horse and his hat at Arcis-sur-Aube, or in its
  neighbourhood. After the battle of Brienne, as he was returning to
  head-quarters in the evening, in a melancholy and pensive mood, he was
  suddenly attacked by some Cossacks, who had passed over into the rear
  of the army. He thrust one of them off with his hand, and was obliged
  to draw his sword in his own defence; several of the Cossacks were
  killed at his side. “But what renders this circumstance very
  extraordinary,” said he, “is, that it took place near a tree which at
  that moment caught my eye, and which I recognized as the very one
  under which, when I was but twelve years old, I used to sit during
  play-hours and read _Jerusalem Delivered_.” ... Doubtless on that spot
  Napoleon had been first fired by the love of glory!

  The Emperor repeated that he had been very frequently exposed to
  danger in his different battles, but it was carefully kept secret. He
  had enjoined once for all, the most absolute silence on all
  circumstances of that nature. He said that it would be impossible to
  calculate the confusion and disorder which might have resulted from
  the slightest report or the smallest doubt relative to his existence.
  On his life depended the fate of a great Empire, and the whole policy
  and destinies of Europe. He added that this habit of keeping
  circumstances of that kind secret had prevented him from relating them
  in his campaigns; and indeed he had now almost forgotten them. It was
  only, he said, by mere accident, and in the course of conversation,
  that they could recur to him.

                  MY CONVERSATION WITH AN ENGLISHMAN.

  26th.—The Emperor continued indisposed.

  One of the English gentlemen, whose wife had yesterday been refused
  admittance, in company with the Admiral, paid me a visit this morning,
  with the view of making another and a final attempt to get presented
  to Napoleon. This gentleman spoke French very well, having resided in
  France during the whole of the war. He was one of those individuals
  who were known at the time by the title of _detenus_: who, having
  visited France as travellers, were arrested there by the First Consul,
  on the rupture of the treaty of Amiens, by way of reprisal for the
  seizure of our merchant-ships by the English Government, according to
  its custom, before the declaration of war. This event gave rise to a
  long and animated discussion between the two Governments; and even
  prevented, during the whole of the war, a cartel for the exchange of
  prisoners. The English ministers persisted in refusing to consider
  their detained countrymen as prisoners, lest they should, in so doing,
  make an implicit renunciation of what may perhaps be called their
  _right of piracy_. However, their obstinacy cost their countrymen a
  long captivity. They were detained in France more than ten years;
  their absence was as long and as irksome, though not so glorious, as
  that of the besiegers of Troy.

  This English gentleman was a brother-in-law of Admiral Burton, the
  Commander on the Indian station, who lately died. This circumstance
  might very possibly procure for him an immediate communication with
  Ministers on his arrival in England. He might perhaps have been
  appointed by the Admiral to be the bearer of intelligence respecting
  us. Instead, therefore, of declining conversation, I prolonged it. It
  lasted more than two hours, and was all calculated on my part with a
  view to what he might repeat to the Admiral, or communicate to the
  Government or private circles in England. I will not tire my readers
  by a recital of it. They would only find the same eternal
  recapitulation of our reproaches and grievances: a repetition of our
  complaints and vexations: a continued exposure of the violation of
  those laws that are esteemed most sacred; of the outrage on our good
  faith; of the arrogance, impudence, and petty insolence of power. I
  dwelt particularly on the ill-treatment to which we were here exposed;
  and on the caprices of the individual who was appointed our keeper.
  “His glory,” said I, “should consist, not in oppressing, but in
  relieving us. He should endeavour to make us forget, by his
  attentions, all the rigour and injustice of his country’s policy. Can
  he court the reprobation of mankind, when his good fortune enables him
  to connect his name gloriously with that of the man of the age, the
  hero of history? Can he object that he is bound by his instructions?
  But even then, in the spirit of our European manners, honour enables
  him to interpret them in a suitable manner.”

  The Englishman listened to me with great attention. He seemed
  occasionally to take particular interest in what I said; and expressed
  his approbation of several of my remarks. But was he sincere, and will
  he not express very different sentiments in London?

  Whenever a ship arrives in England from St. Helena, the public papers
  immediately give insertion to various stories relative to the captives
  at Longwood, of so false and absurd a nature, as must necessarily
  render them ridiculous to the great mass of the public. When we
  expressed our indignation at these idle reports in the presence of
  honourable and distinguished Englishmen here, they replied: “Do not
  deceive yourselves, these false accounts proceed not from our
  countrymen who visit you; but from our Ministers in London; for, to
  the excess and violence of power, the administration by which we are
  now ruled adds all the meanness of the lowest and vilest intrigues.”

               ON THE FRENCH EMIGRANTS.—KINDNESS SHEWN BY
                THE ENGLISH.—RESOURCES OF THE EMIGRANTS.

  27th.—The Emperor felt himself better, and rode out on horseback about
  one o’clock. On his return he received the officers of the 53rd, and
  behaved to them in the most amiable and condescending manner.

  After this visit, the Emperor, who had desired me to remain with him,
  walked in the garden. I there gave him an account of the conversation
  I had had the day before with the Englishman. He then asked me some
  questions relative to the French emigrants, London, and the English. I
  told him that though the emigrants in a body did not like the English,
  yet there were few who did not become attached to some Englishman or
  other: that though the English were not fond of the emigrants, yet
  there were few English families who did not shew themselves friendly
  to some of the French. This is the real key to those sentiments and
  reports, so often contradictory, that are met with on the subject.
  With regard to the kindness we received from the English, particularly
  the middle class, from whom the character of a nation is always to be
  learned, it is beyond all expression, and has entailed a heavy debt of
  gratitude upon us. It would be difficult to enumerate the private
  benefactions, the benevolent institutions, and the charitable
  measures, by which our distresses were relieved. The example of
  individuals induced the Government to assist us by regular allowances;
  and even when these were granted, private benevolence did not cease.

  The Emperor here asked me whether I had been a sharer in the grants
  supplied by the English Government: I told him that I had felt more
  pleasure in being indebted for support solely to my own exertions; and
  that the state of society and encouragement of industry in England
  were such that with this feeling a man was sure to succeed. On two
  occasions I had had an opportunity of making my fortune: Colbert,
  Bishop of Rhodez, a native of Scotland, who was very fond of me,
  proposed that I should accompany his brother to Jamaica, where he was
  appointed to the head of the executive power, and where he was one of
  the most considerable planters. He would have intrusted to me the
  direction of his property, and would have obtained for me other
  employment of the same kind. The Bishop assured me that I should make
  a fortune in three years. I could not, however, prevail on myself to
  go; I preferred continuing a life of poverty, to removing to a greater
  distance from the French shore.

  “On another occasion,” continued I, “some friends wished to persuade
  me to go to India, where I should have obtained employment and
  patronage, and was assured that in a short time I should realize a
  considerable fortune. But this I declined. I thought myself too old to
  travel so far. This was twenty years ago; and yet I am now at St.
  Helena.

  “However, there were few who suffered greater hardships than I did at
  the commencement of my emigration, and who enjoyed greater comforts
  towards its close. I have more than once found myself on the point of
  being entirely destitute of every thing. Still I was never discouraged
  or dejected. I consoled myself with the treasure of philosophy, and
  compared my own condition with that of numbers around me, who were
  more wretched than myself: to old men and women, for example, to those
  who were destitute of education, or who, wanting the faculties
  requisite for acquiring a foreign language, were thus cut off from all
  resources. I was young, full of hope, and capable of exertion. I
  taught what I did not well know myself, whatever was asked of me, and
  I learned over-night what I might have to teach on the succeeding day.
  My Historical Atlas was a fortunate idea, which opened to me a mine of
  gold. At that period, however, I had executed only an outline of my
  plan; but in London every thing is encouraged, every thing sells; and,
  moreover, Heaven blessed my exertions. I landed at the mouth of the
  Thames, and reached London on foot, with only seven louis in my
  pocket, without a friend, without an introduction, in a foreign land;
  but I left it in a post-chaise, possessed of 2500 guineas, having
  gained many dear friends, to serve whom I would gladly have sacrificed
  my life.”

  “But, supposing I had been an emigrant,” said the Emperor, “what would
  have been my lot?” He took a view of various professions, but decided
  in favour of a soldier’s life. “I should have fulfilled my career
  after all,” said he.—“That is not quite certain,” I observed. “Sire,
  you would have been smothered in the crowd. On arriving at Coblentz in
  any French corps, you would have been placed according to your rank on
  the list, without any possibility of getting beyond it; for we were
  rigid observers of forms,” &c.

  The Emperor then enquired when and how I had returned to France.
  “After the peace of Amiens,” said I, “availing myself of the benefit
  of your amnesty; yet I joined an English family, and slipped in in a
  sort of contraband way, in order to reach Paris earlier than I
  otherwise could have done. Immediately on my arrival there, fearing
  lest I should compromise that family, I went in person to make my
  declaration to the police, and received a paper which I was to present
  for inspection once a week or once a month. I paid no attention to it;
  but nothing happened to me through my neglect. I had determined on
  conducting myself with prudence, and therefore felt satisfied that I
  had nothing to fear. At one time, however, I saw that my intention
  might have cost me dear: it was during the most violent crisis of the
  affair of Georges and Pichegru. I usually passed my evenings in the
  society of intimate friends in my own house; I scarcely ever went out.
  On this occasion, however, impelled by fate, or, perhaps, by the
  strong interest which I took in passing events, I strolled about in
  the Faubourg Saint-Germain till rather a late hour in the evening. I
  missed the way to the Pont de Louis XVI. which I knew so well, and
  came out upon the Boulevard des Invalides, without knowing where I
  was. The posts were everywhere increased in number, and each consisted
  of a doubled guard. I enquired my way of one of the sentinels, and I
  distinctly heard his comrade, who was a few yards off, ask him why he
  had not stopped me; he answered that I was doing no harm. I hastened
  home as fast as I could, terrified at the danger I had so narrowly
  escaped. I was in formal contravention to the police: the
  circumstances of my emigration, my name, my habits, and my opinions,
  all tended to identify me with the malcontents. Every enquiry that
  could have been instituted respecting me would have been to my
  prejudice. I could not have referred to any one; and what alarmed me
  still more was that they would have found five guineas in my pocket. I
  had, it is true, been in France two years; but these guineas were the
  last fruits of my industry: I always carried them about me, and I have
  them with me still. I used to take a pleasure in seeing them: they
  reminded me of a period of misfortune which had gone by. It is easy to
  conceive the conclusions which might have been drawn from so many
  concurring circumstances. In vain would have been my denials and
  assertions; no credit would have been given to me. I should, no doubt,
  have suffered considerably; and yet I was not in the least to blame:
  such is the justice of men! However, I never took the trouble to
  arrange my business with the police; and yet I never got into any
  difficulty.

  “When I was presented at your Majesty’s court, the emigrants, who were
  in the same situation as myself, and had been placed under the
  superintendence of the police for ten years, applied for their
  emancipation, which they procured; for my part, I determined to let my
  _surveillance_ die a natural death. Being invited, in your Majesty’s
  name, to a fête at Fontainebleau, I thought it would be a good jest to
  apply to the police for a passport. They agreed that it was, strictly
  speaking, necessary, but declined giving it, on the ground that it
  would tend to make government ridiculous. At a subsequent period,
  having become your Majesty’s Chamberlain, I had occasion to go on a
  private journey; and they then exempted me from all future formality.

  “On your Majesty’s return in 1815, being desirous of serving some
  emigrants who had returned with the King, I went in their name to the
  police. Being a Councillor of State, all the registers were open to
  me. After having inspected the article relating to my friends, I felt
  a curiosity to refer to my own. I found myself designated as a
  distinguished courtier of the Comte d’Artois, in London. I could not
  help reflecting on the differences of times, and the changes produced
  by revolution. However, my register was altogether incorrect. I
  certainly visited the Comte d’Artois; but not oftener than once a
  month. As to my being a courtier, if I had been ever so much inclined
  to be one, the thing was out of my power. I had to provide for my
  daily subsistence, and I had pride enough to wish to live by my own
  industry; my time was therefore valuable.” The Emperor was very much
  amused by my story, and I felt much pleasure in relating it to him.

  The Doris frigate sailed this day for Europe.

  28th.—Mr. Balcombe’s family called, in the hope of seeing the Emperor,
  but he was again indisposed. His health declines; this place is
  evidently unfavourable to him. He sent for me at three o’clock; he was
  slightly feverish, but felt himself better. He spoke a good deal of
  the domestic arrangements of the house, which sometimes annoyed him.
  He then dressed, with the intention of going out. I persuaded him to
  resume his flannel under-waistcoat, which he had laid aside very
  imprudently in this damp and variable climate. We took a walk in the
  garden, and the conversation continued to turn on the same subject as
  before. The Emperor strolled about at random, and we came to the
  gum-trees which run along the park, conversing on our local situation,
  and our relations with the authorities, and speculating on the
  political events of Europe. We were overtaken by a shower of rain, and
  were forced to take shelter under a tree. The Grand Marshal and M. de
  Montholon soon joined us. The Emperor made me return with him; and
  when we got home, he played a game at piquet in the drawing-room with
  Madame de Montholon. As it was very damp, the Emperor ordered a fire;
  but as soon as it was lighted, we were driven away by the smoke, and
  were compelled to take refuge in the Emperor’s chamber. Here the game
  was resumed; but it was very soon suspended by the Emperor’s
  conversation, which became most interesting. He entertained us with
  anecdotes and minute details of his domestic life; and confirmed,
  corrected, or contradicted those which Madame de Montholon and myself
  related to him, as having been publicly circulated. Nothing could be
  more gratifying: the conversation was quite confidential, and we
  sincerely regretted its interruption by the announcement of dinner.

              DIFFICULT EXCURSION.—RIDE TO THE VALLEY.—THE
                MARSH.—CHARACTERISTIC TRAITS.—ENGLISHMEN
                   UNDECEIVED.—POISON OF MITHRIDATES.

  29th.—There is a spot in the grounds about Longwood, which commands a
  distant view of that part of the sea where the ships are first seen on
  their arrival: here, too, is a tree at the foot of which the spectator
  may survey it at his ease. I had been in the habit, for some days, of
  spending a few idle moments here, amusing myself, in idea, with
  looking out for the ship that was to conclude our exile. The
  celebrated Münich lingered out twenty years in the heart of Siberia,
  drinking every day to his return to St. Petersburg, and was at length
  blessed with the accomplishment of his wish. I shall possess his
  courage; but I trust I shall not have occasion for his patience.

  Ships had successively appeared for several days. Three came in sight
  very early this morning, two of which I judged to be ships of war.—On
  my return home, I was informed that the Emperor had already risen: I
  went to the garden to meet him, and to acquaint him with my discovery.
  He ordered breakfast to be brought to him under a tree, and desired me
  to keep him company. After breakfast, he directed me to ride out with
  him on horse-back. We rode along by the side of the gum-trees, beyond
  the confines of Longwood, and then attempted to descend into a very
  steep and deeply-furrowed valley, whose sides were covered with sand
  and loose stones, interspersed with brambles. We were obliged to
  dismount. The Emperor desired General Gourgaud to turn off to one side
  with the horses and the two grooms who accompanied us, and insisted on
  continuing his journey on foot, amidst the difficulties which
  surrounded us. I gave him my arm, and, with a great deal of trouble,
  we succeeded in clambering over the ridges. The Emperor lamented the
  loss of his youthful agility, and accused me of being more active than
  himself. He thought that there was a greater difference in this
  respect than the trifling disproportion of our ages would justify. I
  told him that the pleasure of serving him made me forget my age. As we
  were going along, he observed that any one who could have seen us at
  that time would recognize without difficulty the restlessness and
  impatience of the French character. “In fact,” said he, “none but
  Frenchmen would ever think of doing what we are now about.” At length
  we arrived, breathless, at the bottom of the valley. What we had at a
  distance mistaken for a beaten road, proved to be nothing but a little
  streamlet, a foot and a half wide. We proposed to step across it and
  wait for our horses; but the banks of this little streamlet were very
  treacherous. They appeared to consist of dry ground which at first
  supported us, but we soon found ourselves suddenly sinking, as though
  we had been breaking through ice. I had already sunk nearly above my
  knees, when, by a sudden effort, I disengaged myself, and turned to
  assist the Emperor, who had both legs in the mud, and had got his
  hands on the ground, endeavouring to extricate himself. With a great
  deal of trouble, and a great deal of dirt, we regained the _terra
  firma_; and I could not help thinking of the marshes of Arcole, which
  we had been engaged in describing a few days before, and in which
  Napoleon was very near being lost. The Emperor looked at his clothes
  and said, “Las Cases, this is a dirty adventure. If we had been lost
  in the mud,” added he, “what would have been said in Europe? The
  canting hypocrites would have proved, beyond a doubt, that we had been
  swallowed up for our crimes.”

  The horses being at length brought to us, we continued our journey,
  breaking through hedges, and leaping over ridges; and with great
  difficulty rode up the whole length of the valley, which separates
  Longwood from Diana’s Peak. We returned by the way of Madame
  Bertrand’s residence; it was three o’clock when we reached home. We
  then learned that the vessels which had been seen in the morning were
  a brig and a transport from England, and an American ship.

  The Emperor sent for me about seven o’clock; he was with the Grand
  Marshal, who was reading to him the newspapers from the 9th to the
  16th of October. He had not done reading at nine o’clock. The Emperor,
  astonished to find it so late, hastily rose and went to the table,
  complaining of being kept waiting for his dinner. They were stupid
  enough to give a very ridiculous reason for the delay. This domestic
  irregularity irritated him very much; and then he was angry with
  himself for having given vent to his anger; so the dinner passed off
  in dulness and silence.

  However, on returning to the drawing-room, to the dessert, the Emperor
  began to converse on the news which the papers had brought us: the
  conditions of peace, the fortresses ceded to foreign powers, and the
  fermentation of the great cities of Europe. He treated these subjects
  in a masterly style. He retired early; and had evidently not forgotten
  the moment preceding dinner.

  He soon sent for me, being desirous to continue the perusal of the
  papers. As I was preparing to read, he recollected the state of my
  eyes, and would not allow me. I begged to be permitted to continue,
  telling him that I read quickly, and should soon have finished them;
  but he took them away from me, saying, “We cannot command nature. I
  forbid it; I will wait till to-morrow.” He then began to walk about a
  little, and soon gave utterance to the feelings which had oppressed
  his spirits. How amiable he appeared in his reproaches and complaints!
  How humane and kind he seemed! How just and true was every observation
  that escaped him! These were a few of the precious moments when
  Nature, taken by surprise, exposes the inmost recesses of the human
  heart and character. I left him, saying within myself, as I have so
  often had occasion to say: “Good God, how little has the character of
  the Emperor been known to the world!”

  They are, however, beginning here to form a more just opinion of him.
  Those Englishmen whose violent prejudices against him were in a great
  degree excusable from the false accounts they had received, begin now
  to entertain a more correct idea of his character. They allow that
  they are strangely undeceived every day, and that the Emperor is a
  very different being from that Napoleon whose image had been traced to
  them through the medium of falsehood and political interests. All
  those who have had opportunities of seeing him and hearing him
  converse, have but one opinion on the subject. The Admiral has more
  than once, in the midst of our disputes with him, hastily exclaimed
  that the Emperor was decidedly the most good-natured, just, and
  reasonable of the whole set. And he was in the right.

  On another occasion, an Englishman, whom we frequently saw, confessed
  to Napoleon, with the utmost humility of heart, and as it were by way
  of expiation, that he had to reproach his conscience with having once
  firmly believed all the abominable falsehoods related of him. He had
  given credit to all the accounts of stranglings, massacres, and brutal
  ferocity; in short, he even believed in the deformities of his person,
  and the hideous features of his countenance. “And how,” said he
  candidly, “could I help crediting all this? Our English publications
  were filled with these statements; they were in every mouth; not a
  single voice was raised to contradict them.”—“Yes,” said Napoleon,
  smiling, “it is to your Ministers that I am indebted for these
  favours: they inundated Europe with pamphlets and libels against me.
  Perhaps they might say, in excuse, that they did but reply to those
  which they received from France; and it must in justice be confessed
  that those Frenchmen who have since been seen to exult over the ruins
  of their country felt no hesitation in furnishing them with such
  articles in abundant supplies.

  “Be this as it may, I was repeatedly urged during the period of my
  power, to adopt measures for counteracting this underhand work; but I
  always declined it. What advantage should I have gained by such a
  defence? It would have been said that I had paid for it, and that
  would only have discredited me still more. Another victory, another
  monument,—these, I said, are the best, the only answers I can make.
  Falsehood passes away, and truth remains! The sensible portion of the
  present age, and posterity in particular, will form their judgment
  only from facts. And what has been the consequence? Already the cloud
  is breaking; the light is piercing through, and my character grows
  clearer every day. It will soon become the fashion in Europe to do me
  justice. Those who have succeeded me possess the archives of my
  administration and police, and the records of my tribunals: they hold
  in their pay, and at their disposal, those who must have been the
  perpetrators and the accomplices of my atrocities and crimes; yet what
  proofs have they brought forward? What have they made known?

  “The first moments of fury being passed away, all honest and sensible
  men will render justice to my character; none but rogues or fools will
  be my enemies. I may rest at ease; the succession of events, the
  disputes of opposing parties, their hostile productions, will daily
  clear the way for the correct and glorious materials of my history.
  And what advantage has been reaped from the immense sums that have
  been paid for libels against me? Every trace of them will soon be
  obliterated; while my institutions and monuments will recommend me to
  the remotest posterity.

  “It is now, moreover, too late to heap abuse upon me. The venom of
  calumny,” said he, repeating an idea which he had before expressed,
  “has been exhausted on me; it can no longer injure me; it operates
  only _like poison on Mithridates_.”

THE EMPEROR PLOUGHING.—THE WIDOW’S MITE.—INTERVIEW WITH THE ADMIRAL.—NEW
  ARRANGEMENTS.—THE POLISH CAPTAIN PIONTKOWSKY.

  30th.—The Emperor desired me to be called before eight o’clock. While
  he dressed, I finished reading to him the newspapers which I had begun
  to examine the day before. When dressed, he himself went to the
  stables, asked for his horse, and rode out with me alone; his
  attendants not being yet quite ready. We rode on at random, and soon
  arrived in a field where some labourers were engaged in ploughing. The
  Emperor alighted from his horse, seized the plough, and, to the great
  astonishment of the man who was holding it, he himself traced a furrow
  of considerable length. He again mounted and continued his ride
  through various parts of the neighbourhood, and was joined
  successively by General Gourgaud and the grooms.

  On his return, the Emperor expressed a wish to breakfast under a tree
  in the garden; and desired us to remain with him. During the ride, he
  had mentioned a little present that he intended for us. “It is a
  trifle, to be sure,” observed he; “but every thing must be
  proportioned to circumstances, and to me this is truly _the widow’s
  mite_.” He alluded to a monthly stipend which he had determined to
  settle on each of us. It was to be deducted from an inconsiderable
  sum, which we had contrived to secrete in spite of the vigilance of
  the English; and this sum was henceforth Napoleon’s sole resource. It
  may well be imagined how precious this trifle had become. I seized the
  first moment, on finding myself alone with him, to express my opinion
  on this subject, and to declare my own personal determination to
  decline his intended bounty. He laughed at this, and as I persisted in
  my resolution, he said, pinching my ear, “Well, if you don’t want it
  now, keep it for me: I shall know where to find it when I stand in
  need of it.”

  After breakfast, the Emperor went in-doors, and desired me to finish
  reading the newspapers. I had been some time engaged in reading, when
  M. de Montholon requested to be introduced. He had just had a long
  conversation with the Admiral, who was very anxious to see the
  Emperor. I was directed to suspend my translations from the
  newspapers, and the Emperor walked about for some time, as though
  hesitating how to proceed; at length, taking up his hat, he went into
  the drawing-room to receive the Admiral. This circumstance afforded me
  the highest satisfaction; for I knew that it was calculated to put a
  period to our state of hostility. I was well assured that two minutes’
  conversation with the Emperor would smooth more difficulties than two
  days correspondence with any one else. Accordingly I was soon informed
  that his convincing arguments and amiable manners had produced the
  wished-for effect. I was assured that on his departure the Admiral
  appeared enchanted: as for the Emperor, he was very well pleased at
  what had taken place; he is far from disliking the Admiral: he is even
  somewhat prepossessed in his favour. “You may be a very good seaman,”
  said the Emperor to him, “but you know nothing at all about our
  situation. We ask nothing of you. We can bear in silence and
  retirement our pains and privations; we can find resources within
  ourselves; but still our esteem is worth obtaining.” The Admiral
  referred to his instructions. “But,” replied the Emperor, “you do not
  consider the vast distance that intervenes between the dictation and
  the execution of those instructions! The very individual who issues
  them in a remote part of the world would oppose them if he saw them
  carried into execution. Besides,” continued he, “it is certain that on
  the least difference, the least opposition, the slightest expression
  of public opinion, the Ministers would disavow their instructions, or
  severely blame those who had not given them a more favourable
  interpretation.”

  The Admiral conducted himself wonderfully well; the Emperor had every
  reason to be satisfied with him: all asperities were softened down,
  and good understanding prevailed on every point. It was agreed that
  the Emperor should henceforth freely ride about the Island; that the
  officer who had been instructed to attend him, should merely watch him
  from a distance, so that the Emperor might not be offended with the
  sight of a guard; that visitors should be admitted to the Emperor, not
  with the permission of the Admiral, as the inspector of Longwood, but
  with that of the Grand Marshal, who did the honours of the
  establishment.

  To-day our little colony was increased by the arrival of Captain
  Piontkowsky, a native of Poland. He was one of those individuals whom
  we had left behind us at Plymouth. His attachment to the Emperor, and
  his grief at being separated from him, had subdued the severity of the
  English Ministers, and he had received permission to proceed to St.
  Helena.

                      LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR SKELTON.

  31st.—Lieutenant-Governor Skelton and his lady, who had always shewn
  us great attentions, came to present their respects to the Emperor,
  who, after an hour’s conversation, desired me to translate to the
  Colonel an invitation to ride out with him on horseback. The
  invitation was joyfully accepted, and we set out. We passed through
  the valley which separates us from Diana’s Peak, to the great
  astonishment of the Colonel, to whom this ride was perfectly new. He
  found it fatiguing, and in many parts dangerous. The Emperor detained
  Colonel and Mrs. Skelton to dinner, and entertained them in the most
  agreeable way.

              NEW-YEAR’S DAY.—FOWLING-PIECES, &C.—COLONEL
                            WILKS’S FAMILY.

  January 1st—3rd, 1816. On new-year’s-day we all assembled about ten
  o’clock in the morning, to present the compliments of the season to
  the Emperor. He received us in a few moments. We had to offer him
  wishes rather than congratulations. The Emperor wished that we should
  breakfast and spend the whole day together. He observed that we were
  but a handful in one corner of the world, and that all our consolation
  must be our regard for each other. We all accompanied the Emperor into
  the garden, where he walked about until breakfast was ready. At this
  moment, his fowling-pieces, which had hitherto been detained by the
  Admiral, were sent back to him. This measure, on the part of the
  Admiral, was only another proof of the new disposition which he had
  assumed towards us. The guns could be of no use to the Emperor; for
  the nature of the ground and the total want of game rendered it
  impossible that he could enjoy even a shadow of diversion in shooting.
  There were no birds except a few pigeons among the gum-trees, and
  these were soon killed, or forced to migrate, by the few shots that
  Gen Gourgaud and my son amused themselves in firing.

  It seemed like a fatality that measures, dictated by the best and
  kindest intentions on the part of the Admiral, should still bear an
  appearance of restriction and colouring of caprice, which destroyed
  their effect. Along with the Emperor’s fowling-pieces were two or
  three guns belonging to individuals of his suite. These were delivered
  to their owners; but on condition that they should be sent every
  evening to the tent of the officer on duty. It may well be supposed
  that this proposition induced us, without hesitation, to decline the
  favour altogether; and the guns were not surrendered to us
  unconditionally, until after a little parleying. And after all what
  were the important subjects under discussion? A few fowling-pieces;
  and the owners of them were unfortunate men, banished from the rest of
  the world, surrounded by sentinels, and guarded by a whole camp. I
  mention this circumstance, because, though trifling in itself, it
  proves better than many others our real situation and the mode in
  which we were treated.

  On the 3rd, I breakfasted with Madame Bertrand, whom I was to
  accompany to dine at the Governor’s. From Madame Bertrand’s abode to
  Plantation-House (the Governor’s residence) is an hour and a half’s
  journey in a carriage drawn by six oxen, for the use of horses on this
  road would be dangerous. We crossed or turned five or six passes,
  flanked with precipices several hundred feet high. Four of the oxen
  were taken from the carriage in the rapid descents, and yoked again in
  ascending the hills. We stopped when we had got about three parts of
  the way, to pay a visit to a good old lady, eighty-three years of age,
  who is very fond of Madame Bertrand’s children. Her house is very
  pleasantly situated: she had not been out of it for sixteen years,
  when, hearing of the Emperor’s arrival, she set out for the town,
  declaring that, if it cost her her life, she was resolved to see
  him:—she was happy enough to gain her object.

  Plantation-House is the best situated, and most agreeable residence in
  the whole island. The mansion, the garden, the out-offices, all call
  to mind the residence of a family possessing an income of 25 or 30,000
  livres in one of the French provinces. The grounds are cultivated with
  the greatest attention and taste. A resident at Plantation-House might
  imagine himself in Europe, without ever suspecting the desolation that
  prevails over every other part of the Island. Plantation-House is
  occupied by Colonel Wilks, the Governor, whose authority is now
  superseded by the Admiral. He is a man of most polished manners; his
  wife is an amiable woman, and his daughter a charming young lady.

  The Governor had invited a party of about thirty. The manners and
  ceremonies of the company were entirely European. We spent several
  hours at Plantation-House; and this, we may truly say, has been the
  only interval of oblivion and abstraction that we have enjoyed since
  we quitted France. Colonel Wilks evinced particular partiality and
  kindness to me. We mutually expressed the compliments and sympathy of
  two authors, pleased with each other’s merits. We exchanged our works.
  The Colonel overwhelmed _M. le Sage_ with flattering compliments: and
  those which I returned to him were of the sincerest kind; for his work
  contains a novel and interesting account of Hindostan, where he
  resided for a considerable time in a diplomatic capacity. A spirit of
  philosophy, a fund of information, joined to singular purity of style,
  concur to render it a production of first-rate merit. In his political
  opinions, Colonel Wilks is cool and impartial; he judges calmly and
  dispassionately of passing events, and is imbued with the sound ideas
  and liberal opinions of an intelligent and independent Englishman.

  As we were on the point of sitting down to dinner, we were, to our
  great surprise, informed that the Emperor, in company with the
  Admiral, had just passed very near the gate of Plantation-House; and
  one of the guests (Mr. Doveton, of Sandy-Bay) observed, that Napoleon
  had, in the morning, honoured him with a visit, and spent three
  quarters of an hour at his house.

LIFE AT LONGWOOD.—THE EMPEROR’S RIDE ON HORSEBACK.—OUR
  NYMPH.—NICKNAMES.—ON ISLANDS, AND THE DEFENCE OF THEM.—GREAT
  FORTRESSES; GIBRALTAR.—CULTIVATION AND LAWS OF THE ISLAND. ENTHUSIASM,
  &c.

  4th—8th. When I entered the Emperor’s apartments to give him an
  account of our excursion on the preceding day, he took hold of my ear,
  saying: “Well, you deserted me yesterday: I got through the evening
  very well, notwithstanding. Do not suppose that I could not do without
  you.” Delightful words! rendered most touching by the tone which
  accompanied them, and by the knowledge I now possess of him by whom
  they were uttered.

  The weather has every day been fine, the temperature dry; the heat
  intense, but abating suddenly, as usual, towards five or six o’clock.

  The Emperor, since his arrival at Longwood, had left off his usual
  dictations: he passed his time in reading in his cabinet, dressed
  himself between three and four o’clock, and afterwards went out on
  horseback, accompanied by two or three of us. The mornings must have
  appeared to him longer; but his health was the better for it. Our
  rides were always directed towards the neighbouring valley, of which I
  have already spoken; we either passed up it, taking the lower part of
  it first, and returning by the Grand Marshal’s house; or, on the
  contrary, went up that side first, in order to descend it in
  returning: we even went beyond it once or twice, and crossed other
  similar valleys. We thus explored the neighbourhood, and visited the
  few habitations which it contained; the whole of which were poor and
  wretched. The roads were sometimes impassable; we were even
  occasionally obliged to get off our horses. We had to clear hedges,
  and to scale stone walls, which we met with very frequently; but we
  never suffered anything to stop us.

  In these our customary rides we had for some days fixed on a regular
  resting-place in the middle of the valley. There, surrounded by desert
  rocks, an unexpected flower displayed itself: under a humble roof we
  discovered a charming young girl, fifteen or sixteen years of age. We
  had surprised her the first day in her usual costume: it announced any
  thing but affluence. The following morning we found that she had
  bestowed the greatest pains on her toilet; but our pretty blossom of
  the fields now appeared to us nothing more than a very ordinary
  garden-flower. Nevertheless, we henceforth stopped at her dwelling a
  few minutes every day; she always approached a few paces to catch the
  two or three sentences which the Emperor either addressed, or caused
  to be translated, to her, as he passed by, and we continued our route,
  discoursing on her charms. From that time she formed an addition to
  the particular nomenclature of Longwood: she became _our nymph_. Among
  those who were intimate with him, the Emperor used, without
  premeditation, to invent new names for every person and object that
  attracted his notice. Thus the pass through which we were proceeding,
  at the moment of which I am now writing, received the name of the
  _Valley of Silence_; our host at Briars was our _Amphitryon_; his
  neighbour, the Major, who was six feet high, was our _Hercules_; Sir
  George Cockburn was my _Lord Admiral_, as long as we were in good
  spirits, but, when ill-humour prevailed, there was no title for him
  but such as the _shark_, &c.

  Our nymph is the identical heroine of the little pastoral with which
  Doctor Warden has been pleased to embellish his Letters; although I
  corrected his error, when he gave me the manuscript to read before his
  departure for Europe, by telling him: “if it is your intention to form
  a tale, it is well; but if you wish to depict the truth, you must
  alter this entirely.” It should seem that he thought his tale
  possessed far more interest; and he has preserved it accordingly. But
  to return to our _nymph_: I have been informed that Napoleon brought
  her great good fortune. The celebrity which she acquired through him
  attracted the curiosity of travellers, and her own charms effected the
  rest; she is become the wife of a very rich merchant, or captain, in
  the service of the East-India Company.

  On returning from our rides, we used to find assembled the persons
  whom the Emperor had invited to dine with him. He had, successively,
  the Colonel of the 53rd, several of the officers and their ladies, the
  Admiral, the beautiful and amiable Mrs. Hodson, the wife of our
  Hercules, whom the Emperor went one day to visit in the valley of
  Briars, and of whose children he had taken so much notice, &c.

  After dinner, the Emperor joined one party at cards, and the rest of
  the company formed another.

  The day the Admiral dined at Longwood, the Emperor, whilst taking his
  coffee, discoursed for a few minutes upon the affairs of the Island.
  The Admiral said that the 66th regiment was coming to reinforce the
  53rd. The Emperor laughed at this; and asked him, if he did not think
  himself already strong enough. Then, continuing his general
  observations, he said that an additional seventy-four would be of more
  use than a regiment; that ships of war were the security of an Island;
  that fortifications produced nothing but delay; that the landing of a
  superior force was a complete success, although its effects might be
  deferred for a time; provided, however, the distance did not admit of
  succour arriving.

  The Admiral having asked him which, in his opinion, was the strongest
  place in the world, the Emperor answered, it was impossible to point
  it out, because the strength of a place arises partly from its own
  means of defence, and partly from extraneous and indeterminate
  circumstances. He, however, mentioned Strasburg, Lille, Metz, Mantua,
  Antwerp, Malta, and Gibraltar. The Admiral having told him that he had
  been suspected in England, for some time, of entertaining a design to
  attack Gibraltar: “We knew better than that,” replied the Emperor; “it
  was our interest to leave Gibraltar in your possession. It is of no
  advantage to you; it neither protects nor intercepts any thing; it is
  only an object of national pride, which costs England very dear, and
  gives great umbrage to Spain. It would have been very injudicious in
  us to destroy such ingenious arrangements.”

  On the 6th, I was invited, with Madame Bertrand and my son, to dine at
  Briars, where our old host had assembled much company. We returned
  very late, and not without having been exposed to danger, from the
  difficulties of the road and the darkness of the night, which obliged
  us to perform part of the journey on foot, from consideration for
  Madame Bertrand.

  On the 7th, the Emperor received a visit from the Secretary of the
  Government and one of the members of the Council. He asked them a
  great many questions, as usual, concerning the cultivation, the
  prosperity, and the improvements of which the Island might be capable.
  In 1772, a system had been adopted for furnishing meat at half price
  to the inhabitants from the magazines of the Company; the consequence
  of which was, great idleness, and neglect of agriculture. This system
  was altered five years ago; which, added to other circumstances, has
  revived emulation, and carried the prosperity of the Island to a pitch
  far beyond what it ever enjoyed before. It is to be feared that our
  arrival may prove a mortal blow to this growing prosperity.

  St. Helena, which is seven or eight leagues in circumference (about
  the size of Paris), is subject to the general laws of England and the
  local ones of the island: these local laws are drawn up by a Council,
  and are sanctioned in England by the Court of Directors of the
  East-India Company. The Council is composed of a Governor, of two
  civil members, and a Secretary, who keeps the registers; they are all
  appointed by the Company, and are subject to be removed at pleasure.
  The members of the Council are legislators, administrators, and
  magistrates; they decide without appeal, with the aid of a jury, upon
  civil and criminal matters. There is neither advocate nor attorney in
  the Island; the Secretary of the Council authenticates all acts, and
  is a kind of unique notary. The population of the Island amounts at
  this moment to about five or six thousand souls, including the blacks
  and the garrison.

  I was walking one afternoon in the garden with the Emperor, when a
  sailor, about twenty-two or twenty-three years of age, with a frank
  and open countenance, approached us, with gestures expressive of
  eagerness and joy, mingled with apprehension of being perceived from
  without. He spoke nothing but English, and told me in a hurried
  manner, that he had twice braved the obstacle of sentinels and all the
  dangers of severe prohibition, to get a close view of the Emperor. He
  had obtained this good fortune, he said, looking stedfastly at the
  Emperor, and should die content; that he offered up his prayers to
  Heaven that Napoleon might enjoy good health, and be one day more
  happy. I dismissed him; and, on quitting us, he hid himself again
  behind the trees and hedges, in order to have a longer view of us. We
  frequently met with such unequivocal proofs of the good-will of these
  sailors. Those of the Northumberland, above all, considered themselves
  as having formed a friendship with the Emperor. While we were residing
  at Briars, where our seclusion was not so close, they often hovered
  around us on a Sunday, saying they came to take another look at their
  shipmate. The day on which we quitted Briars, I was with the Emperor
  in the garden, when one of the sailors appeared at the gate, asking me
  if he might step in without giving offence. I asked him of what
  country he was, and what religion he professed. He answered by making
  various signs of the cross, in token of his having understood me, and
  of fraternity. Then looking stedfastly upon the Emperor, before whom
  he stood, and, raising his eyes to Heaven, he began to hold a
  conversation with himself, by gestures, which his great jovial face
  rendered partly grotesque, and partly sentimental. Nevertheless, it
  would have been difficult to express, more naturally, admiration,
  respect, kind wishes, and sympathy; whilst big tears started in his
  eyes. “Tell that dear man,” said he to me, “that I wish him no harm,
  but all possible happiness. So do most of us. Long life and health to
  him!” He had a nosegay of wild flowers in his hand, which he seemed to
  wish to offer to us; but either his attention was taken up, or he felt
  restrained by the Emperor’s presence, or his own feelings, and he
  stood wavering, as if contending with himself for some time; then
  suddenly made us a bow, and disappeared.

  The Emperor could not refrain from evincing some emotion at these two
  circumstances; so strongly did the countenances, accents, and gestures
  of these two men bear the stamp of truth. He then said, “See the
  effect of imagination! How powerful is its influence! Here are people
  who do not know me—who have never seen me; they have only heard me
  spoken of; and what do they not feel! what would they not do to serve
  me! And the same caprice is to be found in all countries, in all ages,
  and in both sexes! This is fanaticism! Yes, imagination rules the
  world!”

               VEXATIOUS TREATMENT OF THE EMPEROR.—FRESH
                  MISUNDERSTANDINGS WITH THE ADMIRAL.

  9th.—The grounds round Longwood, within which we have the liberty of
  taking the air, admit of only half an hour’s ride on horseback; which
  has induced the Emperor, in order to extend his ride, or to occupy
  more time, to descend into the ravines by very bad and indeed
  dangerous ways.

  The Island not being thirty miles in circumference, it would have been
  desirable to have the circuit extended to within a mile of the
  sea-coast; then we might have had our rides, and even varied them,
  within a space of fifteen or eighteen miles. The watching of our
  movements would neither have been more troublesome nor less effectual,
  had sentinels been placed upon the sea-shore and at the openings of
  the valleys; or even had they traced all the Emperor’s steps by
  signals. We had been told, it is true, that the Emperor was at liberty
  to go over the whole of the Island under the escort of an English
  officer; but the Emperor had decided that he would never go out, if
  deprived of the privilege of being either entirely by himself, or in
  the society of his friends only. The Admiral, in his last interview
  with the Emperor, had, with great delicacy, settled that, whenever he
  (the Emperor) wished to go beyond the prescribed limits, he was to
  inform the English Captain on duty at Longwood of the circumstance;
  that the latter should go to his post to open the passage for the
  Emperor; and that the observation, if any, should thenceforth be
  continued in such a manner that the Emperor, during the remainder of
  his excursion, whether he entered any house or took advantage of any
  fine situation for proceeding with his works, might perceive nothing
  that could for a moment distract his mind from meditation. According
  to this arrangement, the Emperor proposed this morning to mount his
  horse at seven o’clock: he had ordered a slight breakfast to be
  prepared, and intended to go in the direction of Sandy Bay, to see a
  spring of water, and to pass the morning amongst some fine vegetation
  (an advantage which we did not possess at Longwood); and in this spot
  he proposed to dictate for a few hours.

  Our horses were ready; at the moment when we were about to mount them,
  I went to acquaint the Captain with our intention, who, to my great
  astonishment, declared his determination of riding beside us; saying
  that the Emperor could not take it ill, after all, that an officer
  would not act the part of a servant by remaining behind alone. I
  replied that the Emperor doubtless would approve this sentiment; but
  that he would immediately give up his party of pleasure. “You must,”
  said I, “think it very natural, and by no means a ground of offence,
  that he feels a repugnance to the company of a person who is guarding
  him.” The officer evinced much concern, and told me that his situation
  was extremely embarrassing. “Not at all so,” I observed to him, “if
  you only execute your orders. We ask nothing of you; you have nothing
  to justify or explain to us. It must be as desirable to you as to us
  to get the limits extended towards the sea-shore: you would thereby be
  freed from a troublesome duty, and one which can do you no honour. The
  end proposed would not be the less effectually accomplished by such an
  arrangement. I will venture to say that it would be more so: whenever
  we wish to watch a person, we must guard the door of his room, or the
  gates of the enclosure which surrounds him; the intermediate doors are
  only sources of unavailing trouble. You lose sight of the Emperor
  every day when he descends into the deep hollows within the circuit,
  and you ascertain his existence only by his return. Well, then, make a
  merit of a concession which the nature of things demands. Extend the
  limits to within a mile of the sea-shore; you may then also trace the
  Emperor constantly by means of your signals from your heights.”

  To all this the officer replied only by repeating that he wanted
  neither look nor word from the Emperor; that he would be with us, as
  if he were not present. He seemed, and indeed he was, unable to
  comprehend that the mere sight of him could be offensive to the
  Emperor. I told him that there was a scale for the degrees of feeling,
  and that the same measure did not apply to all the world. He appeared
  to think that we were putting our own interpretations on the Emperor’s
  sentiments, and that, if the reasons which he gave me were explained
  to him (the Emperor), the latter would accede to them. He was inclined
  to write to him. I assured him that, as far as related personally to
  himself, he would not be able to say so much to the Emperor as I
  myself should: but that I would go and repeat to the Emperor, word for
  word, the conversation which had passed between us. I went, and soon
  returned, and confirmed to him what I had before advanced. The Emperor
  from that moment gave up his intended excursion.

  Wishing, however, on my own account, to avoid every misunderstanding
  which might add to discussions, at all times disagreeable, I asked him
  whether he had any objection to impart to me the account he intended
  to give the Admiral. He told me he had none; but that he should only
  give a verbal one. Then, resuming our long conversation, I reduced it
  in a few words, to two very positive points: on his part, that he had
  told me he wished to join the party of the Emperor: and on mine, that
  I had replied that the Emperor from that moment gave up his party, and
  would not go beyond the limits assigned to him. This statement was
  perfectly agreed upon by both of us. The Emperor ordered me to be
  called into his room. Brooding in profound silence over the vexation
  which he had just experienced, he had undressed again, and was in his
  morning-gown. He detained me to breakfast, and observed that the sky
  seemed to threaten rain; that we should have had a bad day for our
  excursion. But this was a poor consolation for the cruel restraint
  which had just deprived him of an innocent pleasure.

  The fact is that the officer had received fresh orders; but the
  Emperor had only grounded the project of his little excursion upon the
  anterior promises of the Admiral, at which the Emperor had felt a
  pleasure in expressing his satisfaction to him. The present
  alteration, of which nothing had been said to the Emperor, must
  necessarily have been extremely unpleasant to him. Either the word
  given him was broken, or an attempt had been made to impose on him.
  This affront, which he experienced from the Admiral, is one of those
  which have considerably hurt the feelings of the Emperor.

  The Emperor took a bath, and did not dine with us. At nine o’clock he
  ordered me to be called into his room, he was reading Don Quixote,
  which turned our conversation upon Spanish literature, the translation
  of Le Sage, &c. He was very melancholy, and said little; he sent me
  away in about three quarters of an hour.

              MARCHAND’S ROOM.—LINEN, GARMENTS, &C. OF THE
                   EMPEROR,—SPURS OF CHAMPAUBERT, &C.

  10th.—About four o’clock the Emperor desired me to be called into his
  room: he was dressed, and had his boots on; his intention was either
  to get on horseback, or to take a walk in the garden; but a gentle
  shower of rain was falling. We walked about in conversation, waiting
  for the weather to clear up. He opened the door of his room leading to
  the topographical cabinet, in order that we might extend our walk the
  whole length of this cabinet. As we approached the bed, he asked me if
  I always slept in it. I answered that I had ceased to do so from the
  moment that I became acquainted with his wish of going out early in
  the morning. “What has that to do with it?” said he: “return to it; I
  shall go out when I please, by the back-door.” The drawing-room door
  stood half open, and he entered it; Montholon and Gourgaud were there.
  They were endeavouring to fix a very pretty lustre, and a small glass
  over the chimney-piece: the Emperor desired the latter might be set
  straight, as it inclined a little on one side. He was much pleased at
  this improvement in the drawing-room furniture; a proof that every
  thing is relative! What could these objects have been in the eyes of a
  man who, some years ago, had furniture to the value of forty millions
  in his palaces?

  We returned to the topographical cabinet: the rain continued to fall,
  he gave up his promenade; but he regretted that the Grand Marshal had
  not arrived; he felt himself this day inclined for work, which he had
  discontinued for a fortnight. He endeavoured to kill time, whilst
  waiting for Bertrand. “Let us go and see Madame de Montholon,” said he
  to me. I announced him; he sat down, made me do the same; and we
  talked about furniture and housekeeping. He then began to form an
  inventory of the articles in the apartment, piece by piece; and we all
  agreed that the furniture was not worth more than thirty Napoleons.
  Leaving Madame de Montholon’s, he ran from room to room, and stopped
  in front of the staircase in the corridor which leads to the servants’
  room above; it is a kind of very steep ladder. “Let us look at
  Marchand’s apartment,” said he; “they say that he keeps it like that
  of a _petite maîtresse_.” We climbed up; Marchand was there; his
  little room is clean; he has pasted paper upon it, which he has
  painted himself. His bed was without curtains: Marchand does not sleep
  so far from his master’s door; at Briars, he and the two other
  valets-de-chambre constantly slept upon the ground, across the
  Emperor’s doorway, so close that, whenever I came away late, I was
  obliged to step over them. The Emperor ordered the presses to be
  opened; they contained nothing but his linen and his clothes; the
  whole was not considerable, yet he was astonished to find himself
  still so rich. “How many pair of spurs have I?” said he, taking up a
  pair. “Four pair,” answered Marchand. “Are any of them more remarkable
  than the rest?”—“No, Sire.”—“Well, I will give a pair of them to Las
  Cases. Are these old?” “Yes, Sire, they are almost worn out; your
  Majesty wore them in the campaign of Dresden, and in that of
  Paris.”—“Here,” said he, giving them to me; “these are for you.” I
  could have wished that he would have permitted me to receive them on
  my knees. I felt that I was really receiving something connected with
  the glorious days of Champaubert, Montmirail, Nangis, Montereau! Was
  there ever a more appropriate memorial of chivalry, in the times of
  Amadis? “Your Majesty is making me a knight,” said I; “but how am I to
  win these spurs? I cannot pretend to achieve any feat of arms; and as
  to love and devotion, Sire, all I have to bestow has long since been
  disposed of.”

  Still the Grand Marshal did not arrive, and the Emperor wished to set
  to work. “You cannot write any longer then?” he said to me. “Your
  eyesight is quite gone.” Ever since we had been here I had given up
  work entirely; my eyesight failed me, which made me extremely
  melancholy. “Yes, sire,” I replied, “it is entirely gone; and I am
  grieved that I lost it in the Campaign of Italy, without enjoying the
  happiness and glory of having served in it.”—He endeavoured to console
  me, by telling me that I should recover my eyesight, beyond a doubt,
  by repose, adding, “Oh why did they not leave us Planat! that good
  young man would now be of great service to me.” And he desired General
  Gourgaud to come, that he might dictate to him.

                          ADMIRAL TAYLOR, &C.

  11th.—As I was walking after breakfast, about half-past twelve, before
  the gate, I saw a numerous cavalcade approaching, preceded by the
  Colonel of the 53rd: it was Admiral Taylor, who had arrived the
  evening before with his squadron from the Cape, and was to leave us
  the next day but one for Europe. Among his captains was his son, who
  had lost his arm at the battle of Trafalgar, where his father
  commanded the Tonnant.

  Admiral Taylor said he was come to pay his respects to the Emperor;
  but he had just received for answer that he was unwell; at which the
  Admiral was much disappointed. I observed to him that the climate of
  Longwood was very unfavourable to Napoleon. I chose an unlucky time
  for making this observation, as the sky was beautiful, and the place
  displayed at this moment all the illusion which it is capable of
  producing: the Admiral did not fail to remark that the situation was
  charming. I replied, in a tone of genuine sorrow: “Yes, Admiral,
  to-day, and for you, who only remain a quarter of an hour in it.” At
  this he seemed quite disconcerted, began to make excuses, and begged
  me to pardon him for having made use of what he called an impertinent
  expression. I must render justice to the peculiar urbanity of manner
  which he evinced on this occasion.

             THE EMPEROR AIMED AT BY A SOLDIER.—OUR EVENING
                 AMUSEMENTS.—NOVELS.—POLITICAL REMARKS.

  12th—14th. The Emperor had now for several days left off his
  excursions on horseback. The result of his attempt to resume them, on
  the 12th, was neither calculated to revive his partiality for this
  amusement, nor to render it once more habitual to him. We had cleared
  our valley as usual, and were re-ascending at the back part opposite
  Longwood, when a soldier from one of the heights, where there had
  hitherto been no post, called out several times, and made various
  signs to us. As we were in the very centre of our circuit, we paid no
  attention to him. He then came running down towards us, out of breath,
  charging his piece as he ran. General Gourgaud remained behind, to see
  what he wanted, while we continued our route. I could see the General,
  after dodging the fellow many times, collar and secure him: he made
  him follow him as far as the neighbouring post by the Grand Marshal’s,
  which the General endeavoured to make him enter, but he escaped from
  him. He found that he was a drunken corporal, who had not rightly
  understood his watchword. He had frequently levelled his piece at us.
  This circumstance, which might have been very easily repeated, made us
  tremble for the Emperor’s life: the latter looked upon it only as an
  affront, and a fresh obstacle to the continuance of his exercises on
  horseback.

  Napoleon had ceased giving invitations to dinner: the hours, the
  distance, the dressing, were inconvenient to the guests: to us these
  parties produced only trouble and constraint, without any pleasure.

  The Emperor had by degrees resumed his regular work. He now dictated
  daily to the Grand Marshal upon the expedition to Egypt; some time
  before dinner he ordered me and my son to be called to him, in order
  to read the different chapters of the Campaigns of Italy over again,
  and separate them into paragraphs. Reversis had gone out of fashion;
  the Emperor had given it up. The time after dinner was henceforth
  devoted to the reading of some work: the Emperor himself read aloud;
  when he was tired, he handed the book over to some other person; but
  then he never could bear their reading more than a quarter of an hour.
  We were now reading novels, and we began many which we never finished,
  _Manon l’ Escaut_ we soon rejected as fit only for the ante-chamber;
  then followed the _Memoirs of Grammont_, which are so full of wit, but
  so far from honourable to the morals of the great of that period; the
  _Chevalier de Faublas_, which is only to be endured at the age of
  twenty years, &c. Whenever these readings could be protracted to
  eleven or twelve o’clock, the Emperor seemed truly rejoiced. He called
  this making conquests over time; and he found such victories not the
  most easy to gain.

  Politics had also their turn. Every three or four weeks, or
  thereabouts, we received a large packet of journals from Europe; this,
  like the cut of a whip, set us going again for some days, during which
  we discussed, analyzed, and re-discussed the news: and afterwards fell
  again insensibly into our usual melancholy. The last journals had
  reached us by the Greyhound sloop, which had arrived some days before.
  They occupied one of the evenings, and gave rise to one of those
  moments, wherein that ardour and inspiration burst forth from the
  Emperor, which I have sometimes witnessed in the Council of State, and
  which escape him from time to time even here.

  He took large strides as he walked amongst us, becoming gradually more
  animated, and only interrupting his discourse by a few moments of
  meditation.

  “Poor France,” said he, “what will be thy lot! Above all, what is
  become of thy glory!... I suppress the rest, which is of very great
  length: I _must_ suppress it.”

  The papers seeming to say that England desired the dismemberment of
  France, but that Russia had opposed it, the Emperor said that he
  expected this; that it was natural that Russia should be dissatisfied
  at seeing France divided; because she would then have to fear that the
  different states of Germany would unite against her; whilst, on the
  other hand, the English aristocracy must be desirous of reducing
  France to the extremity of weakness, and of establishing despotism
  upon her ruins. “I know,” said he, “that this is not your opinion,”
  addressing himself to me; “you are an Englishman.” I replied that it
  was very difficult to dispute with him; but that it appeared to me
  that in this same English aristocracy, it must be allowed, there might
  possibly exist heads sufficiently clear, as well as hearts just
  enough, to understand that, after having overthrown that which
  threatened their existence, it might prove advantageous to raise up
  that which was no longer to be dreaded; that circumstances were now
  singularly favourable for establishing a new system, which might for
  ever unite the two nations in their dearest interests, and render them
  necessary to each other, instead of keeping them in perpetual enmity,
  &c. The Emperor concluded the conversation by saying that he must be
  very perverse, without doubt; but that, with every consideration that
  he could give the subject, he could foresee nothing but catastrophes,
  massacres, and bloodshed.

                ON THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE CABINET OF
                 BONAPARTE, BY GOLDSMITH.—DETAILS, &C.

  15th.—When I was on board the Northumberland, I had heard the _Secret
  History of the Cabinet of Bonaparte_ by Goldsmith, spoken of, and, in
  my first leisure moments here, I felt an inclination to skim it over;
  but I met with great difficulty in obtaining it, as the English
  excused themselves from putting it into my hands, for a considerable
  time, saying, it was such an abominable libel that they were afraid to
  let me have it, and were themselves ashamed of it. I was for a long
  time under the necessity of urging them incessantly, repeating that we
  were all proof against such civilities; that he who was the object of
  them only used to laugh at such things, when chance brought them
  before his eyes; and moreover that, if this work was so bad as it was
  said to be, it must have failed in its end, and ceased to be hurtful
  at all. I asked who this Goldsmith, the author, was. I was told, he
  was an Englishman who ... at Paris, and who, upon his return to
  England, had endeavoured to avoid ... and at the same time to gain
  more money, by loading with insults and imprecations that idol to whom
  he had so long offered incense. I at last obtained the work. It must
  be confessed that it would be difficult to bring together more
  horrible and ridiculous abominations than are presented to us in the
  first pages of this book: rapes, poison, incest, assassination, and
  all that belongs to them, are heaped by the author upon his hero, and
  that from his earliest childhood. It is true that the author appears
  to have given himself little concern about bestowing on these
  calumnies any air of probability; and that he himself sometimes
  demonstrates their impossibility, and sometimes refutes them by
  anachronisms, alibis, and contradictions of every kind; mistakes in
  the names, persons, and most authentic facts, &c. Thus, for example,
  when Napoleon was only about ten or twelve years of age, and was
  confined within the bounds of the Military School, he causes him to
  commit outrages which would require at least the age of manhood, and a
  certain degree of liberty, &c. The author makes him undertake what he
  calls the robberies of Italy, at the head of eight thousand
  galley-slaves, who had escaped from the bagnio at Toulon. Afterwards,
  he makes twenty thousand Poles abandon the Austrian ranks to join the
  standard of the French General, &c. The same author makes Napoleon
  arrive at Paris in Fructidor, when all the world knows that he never
  quitted his army. He makes him treat with the Prince of Condé, and ask
  the hand of the Princess Royal as the price of his treachery. I omit a
  number of other things equally absurd and impudent. It is evident
  that, with respect to the loose and ridiculous anecdotes particularly,
  he only collected all he could hear; but from what source has he drawn
  his information? The greater part of the anecdotes have certainly had
  their rise in certain defamatory and malevolent circles of Paris; but,
  as long as they were on that ground, they still preserved the
  appearance of some wit, salt, point, colour, some grace in the
  relation; whilst the stories in this book have evidently descended
  from the drawing-rooms into the streets, and have only been picked up
  after rolling in the kennel. The English allowed it to be so coarse
  that, except to the most vulgar classes of society, the work was a
  poison which carried its own antidote along with it.

  It may probably excite astonishment that I did not lay aside such a
  production upon reading the first page of it; but its coarseness and
  vulgarity are so gross that it cannot excite anger: on the other hand,
  there is no disgust which may not be got over in order to amuse the
  heavy hours at St. Helena. We consider ourselves fortunate in having
  any thing to peruse. “Time,” said the Emperor, a few days ago, “is the
  only thing of which we have too much here.” I therefore continued the
  work. And besides, I may perhaps be allowed to say that it is not
  without some pleasure that I now read the absurd tales, the lies, and
  calumnies, which an author pretends to derive, as usual, from the best
  authority, relating to objects which I am now so perfectly well
  acquainted with, and which have become as familiar to me as the
  details of my own life; and it is likewise gratifying to lay down
  pages filled with the falsest representations, and exhibiting a
  portrait purely fanciful to study truth by the side of the real
  personage, in his own conversation, ever full of novelties and grand
  ideas.

  The Emperor having desired me to come to him this morning after
  breakfast, I found him in his morning-gown lying on his sofa. The
  conversation led him to ask me what I was reading at this moment. I
  replied that it was one of the most notorious and scurrilous libels
  published against him, and I quoted to him upon the spot some of its
  most abominable stories. He laughed heartily at them, and desired to
  see the work. I sent for it, and we went over it together. In passing
  from one horrid calumny to another, he exclaimed, “_Jesus!_” crossing
  himself repeatedly—a custom which I have perceived to be familiar with
  him, in his little friendly circle, whenever he meets with monstrous,
  impudent, cynical assertions, which excite his indignation and
  surprise without rousing his anger. As we proceeded, the Emperor
  analyzed certain facts, and corrected points of which the author might
  have known something. Sometimes he shrugged up his shoulders out of
  compassion; at others, he laughed heartily; but he never betrayed the
  least sign of anger. When he read the article which speaks of his
  great debaucheries and excesses, the violences and the outrages which
  he is represented to have committed, he observed that the author,
  doubtless, wished to make a hero of him in every respect; that he
  willingly left him to those who had charged him with impotency; that
  it was for these gentlemen to agree among themselves; adding, merrily,
  “that every man was not so unlucky as the pleader of Toulouse.” They
  were in the wrong, however, he continued, to attack him upon the score
  of morals; him, who, as all the world knew, had so singularly improved
  them. They could not be ignorant that he was not at all inclined, by
  nature, to debauchery; and that, moreover, the multiplicity of his
  affairs would never have allowed him time to indulge in it. When he
  came to the pages where his mother was described as acting the most
  disgusting and abject part at Marseilles, he stopped, and repeated
  several times with an accent of indignation, and something approaching
  to grief, “Ah! Madame!—Poor Madame!—with her lofty character! if she
  were to read this!—Great God!”

  We thus passed more than two hours, after which he began to dress.
  Doctor O’Meara was introduced to him: it was the usual hour of his
  being admitted. “_Dottore_,” said the Emperor to him in Italian,
  whilst he was shaving himself, “I have just read one of your fine
  London productions against me.” The Doctor’s countenance indicated a
  wish to know what it was. I shewed him the book at a distance; it was
  himself who had lent it to me: he was disconcerted. “It is a very just
  remark,” continued the Emperor, “that it is the truth only which gives
  offence. I have not been angry for a moment; but I have frequently
  laughed at it.” The Doctor endeavoured to reply, and puzzled himself
  with high-flown sentences: it was, he said, an infamous, disgusting
  libel; every body knew it to be such; nobody paid any attention to it:
  nevertheless, persons might be found who would believe it, from its
  not having been replied to. “But how can that be helped?” said the
  Emperor. “If it should enter any one’s head to put in print that I had
  grown hairy, and walked on all fours, there are people who would
  believe it, and would say that God had punished me as he did
  Nebuchadnezzar. And what could I do? There is no remedy in such
  cases.” The Doctor went away, hardly able to believe the gaiety, the
  indifference, the good-nature of which he had just been witness: with
  regard to ourselves, we were now accustomed to it.

               THE EMPEROR RESOLVES TO LEARN ENGLISH, &C.

  16th.—About three o’clock the Emperor desired me to come and converse
  with him whilst he was dressing himself; we afterwards took a few
  turns in the garden. He observed, accidentally, that it was a shame he
  could not yet read English. I assured him that, if he had continued
  his lessons after the two that I had given when we were off Madeira,
  he would now be able to read every kind of English books. He was
  thoroughly persuaded of this, and ordered me to oblige him henceforth
  to take a lesson every day. The conversation then led me to observe
  that I had just given my son his first lesson in mathematics. It is a
  branch of knowledge which the Emperor is very fond of, and in which he
  is particularly skilled. He was astonished that I could teach my son
  so much without the help of any work, and without any copy-book; he
  said, he did not know that I was so learned in this way, and
  threatened me with examining, when I did not expect it, both the
  master and the scholar. At dinner he attacked what he called the
  Professor of Mathematics, who was very near being posed by him: one
  question did not wait for another, and they were frequently very keen.
  He never ceased to regret that the mathematics were not taught at a
  very early age in the Lyceums. He said that all the intentions he had
  formed respecting the Universities had been frustrated, complained
  bitterly of M. de Fontanes, lamenting that, whilst he was obliged to
  be at a distance, carrying on the war, they spoiled all he had done at
  home, &c. This led the Emperor back to the first years of his life, to
  father Patrault, his Professor of Mathematics, whose history he gave
  us: I have already introduced it.

                       FIRST ENGLISH LESSON, &c.

  17th.—The Emperor took his first lesson in the English language
  to-day. And as it was my intention to put him at once in a situation
  to read the papers with readiness, this first lesson consisted of
  nothing more than getting acquainted with an English newspaper; in
  studying the form and plan of it; in learning the places that are
  always given to the different subjects which it contains; in
  separating the notices and gossip of the town from politics; and, in
  the latter, in learning to distinguish what is authentic from what is
  mere report or conjecture.

  I have engaged that, if the Emperor could endure being annoyed every
  day with such lessons, he would be able to read the papers in a month
  without the assistance of any of us. The Emperor wished afterwards to
  do some exercises; he wrote some sentences which were dictated to him,
  and translated them into English, with the assistance of a little
  table, which I made for him, of the auxiliary verbs and articles, and
  aided by the dictionary for other words which I made him look out
  himself. I explained to him the rules of syntax and grammar, as they
  came before us: in this manner he formed various sentences, which
  amused him more than the versions which we also attempted. After the
  lesson, at two o’clock, we took a walk in the garden.

  Several musquet shots were fired: they were so near us that they
  appeared to have been fired in the garden itself. The Emperor observed
  to me that my son (we thought it was he) seemed to have good sport: I
  replied that it was the last time he should enjoy it so near the
  Emperor. “Really,” said he, “you may as well go and tell him that he
  is only to come within cannon-shot of us.” I ran: we had accused him
  wrongfully, for the guns were fired by the people who were training
  the Emperor’s horses.

  After dinner, during coffee, the Emperor, taking me to the corner of
  the chimney-piece, put his hand upon my head to measure my height, and
  said, “I am a giant to you.”—“Your Majesty is a giant to so many
  others,” I observed to him, “that I am not at all concerned at it.” He
  spoke immediately of something else; for he does not like to dwell on
  expressions of this kind.

OUR DAILY HABITS.—CONVERSATION WITH GOVERNOR
  WILKS.—ARMIES.—CHEMISTRY.—POLITICS.—REMARKS ON INDIA.—DELPHINE, BY
  MAD. DE STAËL.—NECKER, CALONNE.

  18th—20th. We led a life of great uniformity. The Emperor did not go
  out in the mornings. The English lesson was very regularly taken about
  two o’clock; then followed either a walk in the garden, or some
  presentations, which, however, were very rare; afterwards a little
  excursion in the calash, as the horses were at last arrived. Before
  dinner we proceeded with the revision of the Campaigns of Italy or
  Egypt: after dinner we read romances.

  On the 20th, the Emperor received Governor Wilks, with whom he had a
  profound discussion on the army, the sciences, government, and the
  Indies. Speaking of the organization of the English army, he dwelt
  much on the principles of promotion in it; expressing his surprise
  that, in a country in which equality of rights is maintained, the
  soldiers so seldom become officers.

  Colonel Wilks admitted that the English soldiers were not formed to
  become officers; and said that the English were equally astonished at
  the great difference they had remarked in the French army, where
  almost every soldier shewed the nascent talents of an officer. “That,”
  observed the Emperor, “is one of the great results of the
  Conscription; it has rendered the French army the best constituted
  that ever existed. It is an institution,” he continued, “eminently
  national, and already strongly interwoven with our habits; it had
  ceased to be a cause of grief, except to mothers; and the time was at
  hand, when a girl would not have listened to a young man who had not
  acquitted himself of this debt to his country. And it would have been
  only when arrived at this point,” added he, “that the Conscription
  would have manifested the full extent of its advantages. When the
  service no longer bears the appearance of punishment or compulsory
  duty, but is become a point of honour, on which all are jealous, then
  only is the nation great, glorious and powerful; it is then that its
  existence is proof against reverses, invasions—even the hand of time!

  “Besides,” continued he, “it may be truly said that there is nothing
  that may not be obtained from Frenchmen by the excitement of danger;
  it seems to animate them; it is an inheritance which they derive from
  their Gallic forefathers.... Courage, the love of glory, are, with the
  French, an instinct, a kind of sixth sense. How often in the heat of
  battle has my attention been fixed on my young conscripts, rushing,
  for the first time, into the thickest of the fight: honour and valour
  bursting forth at every pore.”

  After this, the Emperor, knowing that Governor Wilks was well informed
  in chemistry, attacked him on that subject. He spoke of the immense
  progress in all our manufactures occasioned by this science. He said,
  that both England and France, undoubtedly, possessed great chemists;
  but that chemistry was more generally diffused in France, and more
  particularly directed to useful results; that in England it remained a
  science, while in France it was becoming entirely practical. The
  Governor admitted that these observations were perfectly correct, and,
  with a liberality of sentiment, added that it was to him, the Emperor,
  that all these advantages were owing, and that, wherever science was
  led by the hand of power, it would produce great and happy effects
  upon the well-being of society. The Emperor observed that of late
  France had obtained sugar from the beet-root, as good and cheap as
  that extracted from the sugar-cane. The Governor was astonished; he
  had not even suspected it. The Emperor assured him that it was an
  established fact, opposed, as it was, to the rooted prejudices of all
  Europe, France itself not excepted. He added that it was the same with
  woad, the substitute for indigo, and with almost all the colonial
  produce except the dye-woods. This led him to conclude that if the
  invention of the compass had produced a revolution in commerce, the
  progress of chemistry bade fair to produce a counter-revolution.

  The conversation then turned on the present numerous emigrations of
  the artisans of France and England to America. The Emperor observed
  that this favoured country grew rich by our follies. The Governor
  smiled, and replied, that those of England would occupy the first
  place in the list, from the numerous errors of administration, which
  had led to the revolt and subsequent emancipation of the Colonies. The
  Emperor said that their emancipation was inevitable; that when
  children had attained the size of their fathers, it was difficult to
  retain them long in a state of obedience.

  They then spoke of India; the Governor had resided there many years,
  and had filled high situations; he had made important researches; he
  was able to reply to a multitude of questions proposed to him by the
  Emperor, respecting the laws, the manners, the usages of the Hindoos,
  the administration of the English, the nature and construction of the
  existing laws, &c.

  The English are governed according to the laws of England; the natives
  by local acts made by the several Councils in the service of the
  Company, with whom it is a fundamental principle to render them as
  nearly similar as possible to the laws of the people themselves.

  Hyder Aly was a man of genius; Tippoo, his son, was arrogant,
  ignorant, and rash. The former had upwards of 100,000 men; the latter
  scarcely ever more than 50,000. These people are not deficient in
  courage, but they do not possess our physical strength, and have
  neither discipline nor any knowledge of tactics. Seventeen thousand
  men in the English service, of whom only 4000 were Europeans, were
  sufficient to destroy the empire of Mysore. It was, however, to be
  presumed that, sooner or later, the national spirit would rescue these
  regions from the dominion of the Europeans. The intermixture of
  European blood with that of the natives, was producing a mixed race,
  whose numbers and disposition certainly prepared the way for a great
  revolution. Nevertheless, in their actual condition, the people were
  happier than they had been previously to the dominion of the English:
  an impartial administration of justice, and the mildness of the
  government were, for the present, the strongest supports of the power
  of the parent state. It was also considered expedient to prohibit the
  English and other Europeans from buying lands there, or forming
  hereditary establishments, &c.

  Madame de Staël’s _Delphine_ was at this time a subject of
  conversation at our evening parties. The Emperor analyzed it: few
  things in it escaped his censure. The irregularity of mind and
  imagination which pervades it excited his criticism: there were
  throughout, said he, the same faults which had formerly made him keep
  the authoress at a distance, notwithstanding the most pointed advances
  and the most unremitting flattery on her part. No sooner had victory
  immortalized the young General of the Army of Italy, than Madame de
  Staël, unacquainted with him, from the mere sympathy of glory,
  instantly professed for him sentiments of enthusiasm worthy of her own
  _Corinne_; she wrote him long and numerous epistles, full of wit,
  imagination, and metaphysical erudition: it was an error, she
  observed, arising only from human institutions, that could have united
  him with the meek, the tranquil, Madame Bonaparte; it was a soul of
  fire like her’s (Madame de Staël’s) that nature had undoubtedly
  destined to be the companion of a hero like him.

  I refer to the Campaigns in Italy to shew that this forwardness on the
  part of Madame de Staël was not checked by the circumstance of meeting
  with no return. With a perseverance never to be disheartened, she
  succeeded, at a later period, in forming some degree of acquaintance,
  so far even as to be allowed to visit; and she used this privilege,
  said the Emperor, to a disagreeable extent. It is unquestionably true,
  as has been reported, that the General, wishing to make her sensible
  of it, one day caused her to be told, by way of excuse, that he was
  scarcely dressed; and that she replied promptly and seriously, that it
  was unimportant, for that genius was of no sex.

  From Madame de Staël we were naturally led to her father, M. Necker.
  The Emperor related, that at Geneva, in his way to Marengo, he
  received a visit from him, wherein he made known, in an awkward manner
  enough, his desire to be admitted again to the Administration—a
  desire, by the by, which M. Calonne, his rival, subsequently came to
  Paris to express with a degree of levity beyond conception. M. Necker
  afterwards wrote a dangerous work upon the policy of France, which he
  attempted to prove could no longer exist either as a monarchy or a
  republic, and in which he called the First Consul _l’homme
  necessaire_.

  The First Consul proscribed the work, which, at that time, might have
  been highly prejudicial to him, and committed the task of refuting it
  to the Consul Lebrun, “who in his elegant prose,” said the Emperor,
  executed prompt and ample justice upon it. The Necker _coterie_ was
  irritated, and Madame de Staël, engaging in some intrigues, received
  an order to quit France: thenceforth she became an ardent and
  strenuous enemy. Nevertheless, on the return from the Island of Elba,
  she wrote or sent to the Emperor, to express, in her peculiar way, the
  enthusiasm which this wonderful event had excited in her; that she was
  overcome; that this last act was not that of a mortal; that it had at
  once raised its author to the skies. Then, returning to herself, she
  concluded by hinting that, if the Emperor would condescend to allow
  the payment of the two millions, for which an order in her favour had
  already been signed by the King, her pen and her principles should be
  devoted for ever after to his interest.—The Emperor desired she might
  be informed, in answer, that nothing could flatter him more highly
  than her approbation, because he fully appreciated her talents; but
  that he really was not rich enough to purchase it at that price.

              MY NEW LODGING DESCRIBED.—MORNING VISIT, &C.

  21st.—I had at length taken possession of the new lodging built for me
  instead of my former oven. Upon a soil constantly damp had been placed
  a floor eighteen feet long by eleven wide; this was surrounded by a
  wall of a foot and half in thickness, composed of loam, and which
  might have been kicked down with the foot: at the height of seven feet
  it was covered with a roof of boards, defended by a coating of paper
  and tar. Such were the construction and the outline of my new palace,
  divided into two apartments, one of which contained two beds separated
  by a chest of drawers, and afforded room for only a single chair; the
  other, at once my saloon and my library, had a single window strongly
  fastened up on account of the violence of the winds and rain: on the
  right and left of it were two writing-tables, for me and my son; on
  the opposite side a couch and two chairs. This was the whole of the
  furniture and accommodations: add to this that the aspect of the two
  windows is towards a wind constantly blowing from the same quarter,
  and generally accompanied with rain, often very heavy, and which,
  previously to our taking possession, already forced its way through
  the cracks, or soaked through the walls and the roof. I had just
  passed my first night in these new quarters; I was indisposed, and my
  change of bed had prevented me from sleeping. I was informed about
  seven o’clock, that the Emperor was going out on horseback; I replied
  that, not feeling myself well, I should endeavour to take some rest;
  but only a few minutes had elapsed when a person hastily entered my
  apartment, opened my curtains with an air of authority, found fault
  with me for being so idle, and pronounced that my ailments must be
  shaken off; then, struck with the smell of the paint, the extreme
  smallness of the room, and the closeness of the two beds, he decided
  that we could no longer be suffered to sleep huddled together in that
  way; that it was far too unwholesome; and that I must return to the
  bed in the topographical cabinet, which I ought not to abandon through
  false delicacy; and that, if I occasioned any inconvenience there, I
  should be told of it. It will have been guessed that this person was
  the Emperor. I was, of course, soon out of bed, dressed, and well. The
  Emperor was, however, already far off: I had to seek him in the park.
  After I had overtaken him, our conversation turned on the long
  audience that he had given to Governor Wilks on the preceding day. He
  dwelt, with much good humour, on the great importance which my work
  appeared to have given me in the Governor’s eyes, and the extreme
  good-will towards me with which it seemed to have inspired him. “Of
  course,” continued he, “it is understood that these sentiments are to
  be mutual; the usual regard and fraternity of authors, as long as they
  do not criticize each other. And is he aware of your relationship to
  the venerable Las Casas?” I answered that I knew nothing of the
  matter; but General Gourgaud, who was on the other side of the
  Emperor, replied in the affirmative. “And how do you know it
  yourself?” said the Emperor to me; “Are you not romancing with us?”
  “The following, Sire, are my proofs. Our family had been two hundred
  years in France, when Barthelemi de Las Casas flourished in Spain; but
  the Spanish historians all describe him as a native of the same city
  from which we ourselves came, that is to say, Seville. They all
  mention him as of an ancient family, of French origin, and state his
  ancestors to have passed into Spain precisely at the time when our
  family went there.”—“What, then, you are not Spanish? He was French,
  as well as you!”—“Yes, Sire.”—“Let us hear all about it; come, Sir
  Castellan, Sir Knight-errant, Sir Paladin,—let us see you in your
  glory; unrol your old parchments; come, enjoy yourself.”—“Sire, one of
  my ancestors followed Henry Count of Burgundy, who, at the head of a
  few crusaders, achieved the conquest of Portugal, about the year 1100.
  He was his standard-bearer at the famous battle of Ourique, which
  founded the Portugese monarchy. Afterwards we returned to France with
  Queen Blanche, when she came to be married to the father of St. Louis.
  Sire, this is the whole.”

THE EMPEROR’S READINGS.—MADAME DE SEVIGNÉ.—CHARLES XII.—PAUL AND
  VIRGINIA.—VERTOT.—ROLLIN.—VELLY.—GARNIER.

  22nd–26th. These days were rendered unpleasant by almost incessant
  rain. The Emperor was only twice able to ride out—in the park one
  morning, and once in the afternoon through our usual valley, which the
  weather had rendered almost impassable. Nor was it more practicable to
  make use of the calash; we were therefore compelled to confine
  ourselves to a few turns in the garden, and to share in the gloom of
  the weather. We worked, however, the more on this account. The Emperor
  regularly took excellent and long lessons in English. It is his custom
  to pass all the morning in reading; he reads whole works of very
  considerable extent regularly through, without feeling in the least
  fatigued; he always read some part of them to me before he began his
  English lessons.

  One of them was the Letters of Madame de Sevigné, the style of which
  is so easy, and depicts so faithfully the manners of the time. Reading
  the death of Turenne, and the trial of Fouquet, he observed, with
  respect to the latter, that Madame de Sevigné seemed to evince too
  much warmth, too much earnestness and tenderness, for mere friendship.

  Another was _Charles XII._, in reading whose defence of his house, at
  Bender, against the Turks, he could not help laughing, and repeating
  as they did, “_Ironhead! Ironhead!_” He asked me whether the nature of
  this monarch’s death was a settled point. I told him that I had it
  from the mouth of Gustavus III. himself, that he had been assassinated
  by his followers. Gustavus had examined his body in the vault; the
  ball was a pistol-bullet; it had been fired very near, and behind him,
  &c.

  At the beginning of the Revolution, I was well acquainted with
  Gustavus III., at the waters of Aix-la-Chapelle; and, though I was
  then very young, I had more than once the honour of conversing with
  him: he even promised me a place in his navy, if our affairs in France
  should turn out unfavourably.

  Another day the Emperor was reading _Paul and Virginia_; he gave full
  effect to the touching passages, which were always simple and natural;
  those which abounded with the pathos, the abstract and false ideas so
  much in fashion when the work was published, were all, in the
  Emperor’s opinion, cold, bad, spoiled. He said he had been infatuated
  with this book in his youth; but he had little personal regard for its
  author; he could never forgive him for having imposed on his
  generosity on his return from the Army of Italy. “Bernardin de St.
  Pierre’s sensibility and delicacy,” said he, “were little in harmony
  with his charming picture of Paul and Virginia. He was a bad man; he
  used his wife, Didot the printer’s daughter, very ill; he was always
  ready to ask charity, without the least shame. On my return from the
  Army of Italy, Bernardin came to see me, and almost immediately began
  to tell me of his wants. I, who in my early youth had dreamed of
  nothing but Paul and Virginia, and who moreover felt flattered by a
  confidence which I imagined was reposed in me alone, and which I
  attributed to my great celebrity, hastened to return his visit, and,
  unperceived by any one, left on the corner of his chimney-piece a
  little rouleau of five-and-twenty louis. But how was I mortified on
  seeing every one laugh at the delicacy of my proceeding, and on
  learning that such ceremony was entirely superfluous with M.
  Bernardin, who made it his trade to beg of all comers, and to receive
  from every body. I always retained some little resentment towards him,
  for having thus imposed upon me. It was otherwise with my family.
  Joseph allowed him a large pension, and Louis was constantly making
  him presents.”

  But though the Emperor liked Paul and Virginia, he laughed, for very
  pity, at the _Studies of Nature_, by the same author. “Bernardin,”
  said he, “though versed in the belles lettres, was very little of a
  geometrician; this last work was so bad that scientific men disdained
  to answer it: Bernardin complained loudly of their not noticing him.
  The celebrated mathematician Lagrange, when speaking on this subject,
  always said, alluding to the Institute, ‘If Bernardin were one of our
  class—if he spoke our language, we would call him to order; but he
  belongs to the Academy, and his style is out of our line.’” Bernardin
  was complaining as usual, one day, to the First Consul, of the silence
  of the learned with respect to his works. Napoleon asked, “Do you
  understand the differential method, M. Bernardin?”—“No.”—“Well, go and
  learn it, and then you will be able to answer yourself.” Afterwards,
  when Emperor, every time he perceived St. Pierre, he used to say to
  him, “M. Bernardin, when are we to have any more Paul and Virginias,
  or Indian Cottages? You ought to supply us every six months.”

  In reading Vertot’s Roman Revolutions, of which in other respects the
  Emperor thinks highly, he found the declamations much too diffuse.
  This was his constant complaint against every work he took up; he had
  in his youth, he said, been much to blame in this respect himself. He
  may justly be said to have thoroughly reformed afterwards. He amused
  himself with striking out the superfluous phrases in Vertot; and the
  result was that, after the erasures, the work appeared much more
  energetic and animated. “It would certainly be a most valuable and
  successful labour,” said he, “if any man of taste and discernment
  would devote his time to reducing the principal works in our language
  in this manner. I hardly know any writer except Montesquieu who would
  escape those curtailments. He often looked into Rollin, whom he
  thought diffuse, and too credulous. Crevier, his continuator, seemed
  to Napoleon detestable. He complained of our classical works, and of
  the time which our young people are compelled to lose in reading such
  bad books. They were composed by rhetoricians and mere professors, he
  said; whereas such immortal subjects, the basis of all our knowledge
  throughout life, ought to have been written and edited by statesmen
  and men of the world.” The Emperor had excellent ideas on this
  subject; the want of time alone prevented him from carrying them into
  execution.

  The Emperor was still more dissatisfied with our French historians; he
  could not bear to read any of them. Velly is rich in words, and poor
  in meaning: his continuators are still worse. “Our history,” said the
  Emperor, “should either be in four or five volumes, or in a hundred.”
  He had been acquainted with Garnier, who continued Velly and Villaret;
  he lived very near Malmaison. He was an old man of eighty, and lodged
  in a small set of apartments on the ground-floor, close to the road.
  Struck with the officious attention which this good old man always
  evinced whenever the First Consul was passing, the latter enquired who
  he was. On learning that it was Garnier, he comprehended his motives.
  “He, no doubt, imagined,” said the Emperor pleasantly, “that a First
  Consul was his property, as historian. I dare say, however, he was
  astonished to find Consuls, where he had been accustomed to see
  Kings.” Napoleon told him so, himself, laughing, when he called him
  one day, and settled a good pension on him. “From that time,” said the
  Emperor, “the poor man, in the warmth of his gratitude, would gladly
  have written any thing I pleased, with all his heart.”

A DIFFICULTY OVERCOME.—THE EMPEROR’S PERSONAL DANGER AT EYLAU,
  JENA, &C.—RUSSIAN, AUSTRIAN, AND PRUSSIAN TROOPS.—YOUNG
  GUIBERT.—CORBINEAU.—MARSHAL LANNES.—BESSIERES.—DUROC.

  27th.—About five o’clock the Emperor went out in his calash; the
  evening was very fine; we drove rapidly, and the distance to be
  traversed is very short. The Emperor made the servants slacken their
  pace, in order to prolong the ride. As we returned, the Emperor,
  casting his eyes on the camp, from which we were separated only by the
  ravine, asked why we could not pass that way, which would double the
  length of our ride. He was told that it was impossible; and we
  continued our way homeward. But, on a sudden, as if roused by this
  word _impossible_, which he had so often said was not French, he
  ordered the ground to be reconnoitred. We all got out of the carriage,
  which proceeded empty towards the difficult points; we saw it clear
  every obstacle, and returned home in triumph, as if we had just
  doubled our possessions.

  During dinner, and afterwards, the conversation turned on various
  deeds of arms. The Grand Marshal said, that what had most struck him
  in the life of the Emperor happened at Eylau, when, attended only by
  some officers of his staff, a column of four or five thousand Russians
  came almost in contact with him. The Emperor was on foot; the Prince
  of Neufchatel instantly ordered up the horses: the Emperor gave him a
  reproachful look; then sent orders to a battalion of his guard to
  advance, which was a good way behind, and standing still. As the
  Russians advanced, he repeated several times, “What audacity! what
  audacity!” At the sight of the grenadiers of the guard, the Russians
  stopped short. It was high time for them to do so, as Bertrand said.
  The Emperor had never stirred; all who surrounded him had been much
  alarmed.

  The Emperor had heard this account without making any observation;
  but, when it was finished, he said that one of the finest manœuvres
  he remembered was that which he executed at Eckmühl. Unfortunately, he
  did not proceed, or give any particulars. “Success in war,” said he,
  “depends so much on quicksightedness, and on seizing the right moment,
  that the battle of Austerlitz, which was so completely won, would have
  been lost if I had attacked six hours sooner. The Russians shewed
  themselves on that occasion such excellent troops as they have never
  appeared since; the Russian army of Austerlitz would not have lost the
  battle of the Moscowa.”

  “Marengo,” said the Emperor, “was the battle in which the Austrians
  fought best: their troops behaved admirably there; but that was the
  grave of their valour. It has never since been seen.

  “The Prussians, at Jena, did not make such a resistance as was
  expected from their reputation. As to the multitudes of 1814 and 1815,
  they were mere rabble compared to the real soldiers of Marengo,
  Austerlitz, and Jena.”

  The night before the battle of Jena, the Emperor said, he had run the
  greatest risk. He might then have disappeared without his fate being
  clearly known. He had approached the bivouacs of the enemy, in the
  dark, to reconnoitre them; he had only a few officers with him. The
  opinion which was then entertained of the Prussian army kept every one
  on the alert: it was thought that the Prussians were particularly
  given to nocturnal attacks. As the Emperor returned, he was fired at
  by the first sentinel of his camp; this was a signal for the whole
  line; he had no resource but to throw himself flat on his face until
  the mistake was discovered. But his principal apprehension was that
  the Prussian line, which was very near to him, would act in the same
  manner.

  At Marengo the Austrian soldiers had not forgotten the conqueror of
  Castiglione, Arcole, and Rivoli; his name had much influence over
  them; but they were far from thinking that he was present; they
  believed that he was dead: care had been taken to persuade them that
  he had perished in Egypt; that the First Consul, whom they now heard
  spoken of, was only his brother. This report had gained so much credit
  every where that Napoleon was under the necessity of appearing in
  public at Milan, in order to refute it.

  After these anecdotes, the Emperor proceeded to mention a great number
  of his officers and aides-de-camp, distributing praise and censure
  amongst them as he went on; he knew them all thoroughly. Two of the
  circumstances which had most affected him on the field of battle he
  said, were the deaths of young Guibert and General Corbineau. At
  Aboukir, a bullet went quite through the breast of the former, without
  killing him instantly: the Emperor, after saying a few words to him,
  was obliged, by the violence of his feelings, to leave him. The other
  was carried away, crushed, annihilated by a cannon-ball, at Eylau,
  before the Emperor’s face, whilst he was giving him some orders. The
  Emperor spoke also of the last moments of Marshal Lannes, the valiant
  Duke of Montebello, so justly called the Orlando of the army, who,
  when visited by the Emperor on his death-bed, seemed to forget his own
  situation, and to feel only for him, whom he loved above every thing.
  The Emperor had the highest esteem for him. “He was for a long time a
  mere fighting man,” said he, “but he afterwards became an officer of
  the first talents.” Some one then said he should like to know what
  line of conduct Lannes would have pursued in these latter times, if he
  had lived. “We have learned,” said the Emperor, “not to swear to any
  thing. Yet I cannot conceive that it would have been possible for him
  to deviate from the path of duty and honour. Besides, it is hard to
  imagine that he could have existed. With all his bravery, he would
  unquestionably have got killed in some of the last affairs, or at
  least sufficiently wounded to be laid up out of the centre and
  influence of events. And if he had remained disposable, he was a man
  capable of changing the whole face of affairs by his own weight and
  influence.”

  The Emperor next mentioned Duroc, on whose character and life he dwelt
  some time. “Duroc,” concluded he, “had lively, tender, and concealed
  passions, little corresponding with the coldness of his manner. It was
  long before I knew this, so exact and regular was the performance of
  his duty. It was not until my day was entirely closed and finished,
  and I was enjoying repose, that Duroc’s work began. Chance, or some
  accident, could alone have made me acquainted with his character. He
  was a pure and virtuous man, utterly disinterested, and extremely
  generous.”

  The Emperor said that, on the opening of the campaign at Dresden, he
  lost two men who were extremely valuable to him, and in the most
  foolish manner in the world: these were Bessieres and Duroc. In
  mentioning the circumstance, the Emperor now affected a stoicism which
  was visibly not natural to him. When he went to see Duroc, after he
  had received his mortal wound, he attempted to hold out some hopes to
  him; but Duroc, who did not deceive himself, only replied by begging
  him to order opium to be given to him. The Emperor, excessively
  affected, could not venture to remain long with him, and tore himself
  from this distressing spectacle.

  One of the company then reminded the Emperor that, on leaving Duroc,
  he went and walked up and down by himself before his tent: no one
  durst accost him. But, some essential measures being requisite against
  the following day, some one at length ventured to ask him where the
  battery of the guard was to be placed. “Ask me nothing till
  to-morrow,” was the Emperor’s answer.

  At this recollection, the Emperor, with a marked effort, began
  abruptly to talk of something else.

  Duroc was one of those persons whose value is never known till they
  are lost: this was, after his death, the common expression of the
  Court and City, and the unanimous sentiment every where.

  He was a native of Nancy, in the department of La Meurthe. The origin
  of his fortune has been related above. Napoleon found him in the train
  at the siege of Toulon, and immediately interested himself for him.
  His attachment to him increased every day, and it might be said that
  they never more separated. I have elsewhere mentioned that I have
  heard the Emperor say that, throughout his career, Duroc was the only
  person who had possessed his unreserved confidence, and to whom he
  could freely unburden his mind. Duroc was not a brilliant character;
  but he possessed an excellent judgment, and he rendered essential
  services, which, owing to their nature as well as to his reserve, were
  little heard of.

  Duroc loved the Emperor for himself: it was rather to the individual,
  personally, that he was attached, than to the monarch. In being made
  the confidant of his prince’s feeling, he had acquired the art, and
  perhaps the right, of mitigating and directing them. How often has he
  whispered to people struck with consternation by the anger of the
  Emperor:—“Let him have his way: he speaks from his feelings, not
  according to his judgment; nor as he will act to-morrow.” What a
  servant! what a friend! what a treasure! How many storms he has
  soothed! how many rash orders, given in the moment of irritation, has
  he omitted to execute, knowing that his master would thank him the
  next day for the omission! The Emperor had accommodated himself to
  this sort of tacit arrangement; and on that account gave way the more
  readily to those violent bursts of temper, which relieve by the vent
  they afford to the passions.

  Duroc died in the most deplorable manner, at a very critical moment;
  his death was another of the fatalities of Napoleon’s career.

  The day after the battle of Wurzen, towards evening, the skirmish of
  Reichenbach had just ended, the firing had ceased. Duroc was on the
  top of an eminence, apart from the troops, conversing with General
  Kirchner, and observing the retreat of the last ranks of the enemy. A
  piece was levelled at this glittering group, and the fatal ball killed
  both the generals.[30]

Footnote 30:

    General Kirchner was a very distinguished officer of engineers; he
    was brother-in-law to Marshal Lannes, who had chosen him on account
    of his courage and capacity.

  Duroc had more influence over the Emperor’s resolutions than is
  imagined. His death was probably, in this respect, a national
  calamity. There is reason to think that, if he had survived, the
  armistice of Dresden, which ruined us, would not have taken place; we
  should have pushed on to the Oder, and beyond it. The enemy would then
  have instantly acceded to peace, and we should have escaped their
  machinations, their intrigues, and, above all, the base and atrocious
  perfidy of the Austrian Cabinet, which has ended in our destruction.

  At a subsequent period Duroc might still have exerted an influence
  over other great events, and probably changed the face of affairs.
  Finally, even at a later conjuncture, at the time of Napoleon’s fall,
  he would never have separated his destiny from that of the Emperor: he
  would have been with us at St. Helena; and this aid alone would have
  sufficed to counterbalance all the horrible vexations with which
  Napoleon was studiously oppressed.

  Bessieres, of the department of the Lot, was thrown by the Revolution
  into the career of arms. He commenced as a private soldier in the
  constitutional guard of Louis XVI. Afterwards, having attained the
  rank of captain of chasseurs, he attracted the attention of the
  Commander-in-chief of the army of Italy by acts of extraordinary
  personal bravery; and, when the general formed his corps of guides, he
  chose Bessieres to take the command of them. Such was the beginning of
  Bessieres, and the origin of his fortunes. From that instant we find
  him always at the head of the Consular or Imperial guard, in charges
  of the reserve, deciding the battle, or profiting by the victory. His
  name is gloriously connected with all our great battles.

  Bessieres rose with the man who had distinguished him, and shared
  abundantly in the favours which the Emperor distributed. He was made a
  marshal of the Empire, Duke of Istria, colonel of the cavalry of the
  guard, &c.

  His qualities developing themselves as he rose, proved him always
  equal to his fortune. Bessieres was always kind, humane, and generous,
  of antique loyalty and integrity, and, whether considered as a citizen
  or as a soldier, a honest worthy man. He often made use of the high
  favour in which he stood to do extraordinary services and acts of
  kindness even to people of very different ways of thinking from his. I
  know some who, if they have a spark of gratitude in them, will confirm
  my assertion, and can bear testimony to his noble elevated sentiments.

  Bessieres was adored by the Guards, in the midst of whom he passed his
  life. At the battle of Wagram a ball struck him off his horse, without
  doing him any farther injury. A mournful cry arose from the whole
  battalion; upon which Napoleon remarked, the next time he saw him:
  “Bessieres, the ball which struck you drew tears from all my Guard.
  Return thanks to it; it ought to be very dear to you.”

  He was less fortunate at the opening of the campaign of Saxony. On the
  very eve of the battle of Lützen, a trifling engagement occurred, in
  which, having advanced into the very midst of the skirmishers, he was
  shot dead on the spot by a musquet-ball in the breast. Thus, after
  living like Bayard, he died like Turenne.

  I had conversed with him a little before this fatal event. Chance had
  brought us together by ourselves in a private box at the theatre.
  After talking of public affairs which deeply interested him, for he
  idolized his country, his last words, as he left me, were, that he was
  to set out for the army that night, and hoped we should meet again.
  “But, at the present crisis,” said he, “with our young soldiers, we
  leaders must not spare ourselves.” Alas! he was never to return.

  Bessieres was sincerely attached to the Emperor; he almost worshipped
  him; he, like Duroc, would certainly never have abandoned his person
  or his fortunes. And one would really think that Fate, which proved so
  decidedly hostile to Napoleon in his latter days, had resolved to
  deprive him of the sweetest consolation, by thus removing two such
  valuable friends; and at the same time to prevent these faithful
  servants from acquiring the very highest claim to glory, that of
  gratitude to the unfortunate.

  The Emperor caused the remains of these two men whom he so much
  esteemed, and by whom he knew himself to be beloved in return, to be
  carried to the _Invalides_ at Paris. He intended extraordinary honours
  for them, of which subsequent events deprived them. But History, whose
  pages are far more imperishable than marble or bronze, has consecrated
  them, and secured them for ever from oblivion.[31]

Footnote 31:

    The following is extracted from the Campaign of Saxony in 1813, by
    Baron Odeleben, an eye-witness of the circumstance; under date of
    the 10th of August, at the time of the resumption of hostilities,
    two or three months after the death of Duroc.

    “During the march from Reichenbach to Gorlitz, Napoleon stopped at
    Makersdorf, and shewed the King of Naples the place where Duroc
    fell. He summoned to his presence the proprietor of the little farm
    on which the Grand Marshal died, and assigned to him the sum of
    20,000 francs; 4000 of which were for a monument in honour of the
    deceased, and 16,000 for the proprietor of the house and his wife.
    The donation was consummated in the evening, in the presence of the
    rector and the judge of Makersdorf: the money was counted out before
    them, and they were charged to get the monument erected.”

               STUDY OF ENGLISH.—REFLECTIONS.—RIDE.—MIRED
                                 HORSE.

  31st.—Our days passed, as it may be supposed, in an excessively stupid
  monotony. _Ennui_, reflection, and melancholy, were our formidable
  enemies; occupation our great and only refuge. The Emperor followed
  his pursuits with great regularity. English was become an affair of
  importance to him. It was now nearly a fortnight since he took his
  first lesson, and from that moment he had devoted some hours every
  day, beginning at noon, to that study, sometimes with truly admirable
  ardour, sometimes with visible disgust; an alternative which kept me
  in the greatest anxiety. I considered success as of the utmost
  importance: every day I dreaded seeing him abandon the ground gained
  on the day preceding; and consequently being regarded as having
  wearied him with the most tedious labour, without having produced the
  fortunate result that I had promised myself. On the other hand, I was
  also daily spurred on by the consciousness that I was approaching the
  goal at which I aimed. The attainment of the English language was a
  real and serious conquest to the Emperor. Formerly, he said, it had
  cost him a hundred thousand crowns a year, merely for translations;
  and how did he know whether he had them exact—whether they were
  faithful? Now that we were imprisoned, as it were, in the midst of
  this language, surrounded by its productions, all the great changes
  and questions which the Emperor had given rise to, on the continent,
  had been taken up by the English on the opposite side; and in their
  works presented so many new faces to him, to which he had hitherto
  been a stranger.

  It may be added that French books were scarce with us; that the
  Emperor knew them all, and had read them even to satiety; whilst we
  could easily procure a multitude of English works altogether new to
  him. Besides, to learn the language of a foreigner, always
  prepossesses him in our favour; it is a satisfaction to one’s self; it
  facilitates intercourse, and forms in a certain degree the
  commencement of a sort of connection between the parties. However this
  may be, I began to perceive the limits of our difficulties; I
  anticipated the moment when the Emperor would have got through all the
  inevitable disagreeables incident to beginners. But let any one form
  an idea, if possible, of what the scholastic study of conjugations,
  declensions, and articles must have been to him. It could never have
  been accomplished without great courage on the scholar’s side and some
  degree of artifice on the part of the master. He often asked me
  whether he did not deserve the ferula, of which he now comprehended
  the vast utility in schools; he declared, jestingly, that he should
  have made much greater progress himself, had he stood in fear of
  correction. He complained of not having improved; but, in reality, the
  progress he had made would have been extraordinary in any one.

  The more grand, rapid, and comprehensive the mind is, the less it is
  capable of dwelling on regular minute details. The Emperor, who
  discovered wonderful facility in apprehending all that regarded the
  philosophy of the language, evinced very little capacity for retaining
  its material mechanism. He had a quick understanding and a very bad
  memory; this vexed him much; he conceived that he did not get on.
  Whenever I could subject the matters in question to any regular law or
  analogy, they were classed and comprehended in an instant; the scholar
  even preceded the master in his applications and deductions; but as to
  learning by heart, and retaining the gross elements of the language,
  it was a most difficult affair. He was constantly confounding one
  thing with another; and it would have been thought too fastidious to
  require too scrupulous a regularity at first. Another difficulty was
  that, with the same letters, the same vowels, as ours, a totally
  different pronunciation is required; the scholar would allow of none
  but ours; and the master would have multiplied the difficulties and
  disagreeables tenfold, had he required any better. Besides, the
  scholar, even in his own language, was incorrigibly addicted to
  maiming proper names and foreign words; he pronounced them quite at
  his own discretion, and when once they had passed his lips, they
  always remained the same in spite of every thing, because he had thus
  got them, once for all, lodged, as it were in his head. The same thing
  happened with respect to most of our English words: and the master
  found it best to have the prudence and patience to let it pass;
  leaving it to time to rectify by degrees, if it should ever be
  possible, all these defects. From these concurring circumstances
  actually sprang a new language. It was understood by me alone, it is
  true; but it procured the Emperor the pleasure of reading English, and
  he could, in the strictest sense, make himself understood by writing
  in that language. This was a great deal; it was every thing.

  In the mean time, the Emperor regularly continued his Campaigns of
  Egypt with the Grand Marshal. My Campaign of Italy had long been
  finished; we were always touching and retouching it, with respect to
  its typographical form, the arrangement of the chapters, the division
  of the paragraphs, &c.

  From time to time he also dictated separate parts to Messrs. Gourgaud
  and Montholon. To all this work he added a very little exercise: a
  walk now and then, sometimes a ride in the calash, scarcely ever on
  horseback. On the 30th, however, he chose to return to our Valley of
  Silence, which we had long deserted. We were near the middle of the
  vale; the passage was stopped up with dead bushes, and a kind of bar
  to keep out cattle. The servant (the faithful Aly) dismounted, as
  usual, to clear the way for us. We passed on: but, whilst the servant
  was engaged in assisting us, his horse had strayed from him, and, when
  he attempted to catch him, ran away. A great quantity of rain had
  fallen, and the horse sank into a quagmire, similar to that in which
  the Emperor, a few days after our arrival at Longwood, had stuck so
  tenaciously as to make it doubtful whether he would not remain in it.
  The servant ran after us to say that he must remain for the purpose of
  disengaging his horse. We were in a very difficult narrow road, riding
  one by one. It was not until some time after that the Emperor heard us
  mention to one another the accident of the servant. He found great
  fault because we had not waited for him, and desired the Grand Marshal
  and General Gourgaud to return for him. The Emperor dismounted to wait
  for them, and ascended a little elevation, on which he looked like a
  figure on a pedestal in the midst of ruins. He had the bridle of his
  horse passed round his arm, and began to whistle an air; mute nature
  echoed the strains, but only to the barren desert. “Yet,” thought I,
  “a short time ago, how many sceptres he wielded! how many crowns
  belonged to him! how many kings were at his feet! It is true,” said I,
  “that in the eyes of those who approach him, who daily see and hear
  him, he is still greater than ever! This is the sentiment, the opinion
  of all about him. We serve him with no less ardour; we love him with
  greater affection than ever.”

  But now the Grand Marshal and Gourgaud arrived; they assisted the
  Emperor to mount again, and we proceeded. These gentlemen acknowledged
  that without their assistance the horse could never have been saved;
  the united efforts of all three had barely sufficed to disengage him.
  A considerable time afterwards, turning an elbow of the road, the
  Emperor observed that the servant had not followed, and said they
  ought to have remained till they had found he was in a condition to
  come on. They thought that he had staid behind to clean his horse a
  little. In the course of our ride, at several other turnings, the
  Emperor repeated the same observation. We arrived at the Grand
  Marshal’s, went in, and rested there a few minutes; as we came out,
  the Emperor asked whether the servant had passed on; no one had seen
  him. When we arrived at Longwood, his first question was whether the
  man had returned. He had been at home some time, having returned by a
  different road. I may perhaps have dwelt somewhat too much on this
  trifling circumstance; but I did so because it appeared to me
  perfectly characteristic. In this domestic solicitude, the reader will
  find it difficult to recognise the insensible, obdurate, wicked, cruel
  monster—the tyrant, of whom he has so often and so long been told.

           THE EMPEROR SPEAKS IN PRAISE OF ST. HELENA.—SCANTY
                        RESOURCES OF THE ISLAND.

  February 1.—The happiest and wisest philosophy is that which sometimes
  enables us to view the least unfavourable side of the most
  disagreeable things. The Emperor, who was, doubtless at the moment,
  under the influence of this happy feeling, observed, as we were
  walking with him in the garden, that, after all, as a place of exile,
  perhaps St. Helena was the best that could be. In high latitudes we
  should have suffered greatly from cold, and, in other tropical
  islands, we should have dragged out a miserable existence under the
  scorching rays of the sun. “This rock,” continued he, “is wild and
  barren, no doubt; the climate is monotonous and unwholesome; but the
  temperature, it must be confessed, is mild and agreeable.”

  He afterwards asked me, in the course of conversation, which would
  have been preferable, England or America, in case we had been free to
  follow our own inclinations. I replied that, had the Emperor wished to
  spend his days in philosophic retirement, far from the tumult of the
  world, he should have chosen America; but, if he felt any interest, or
  entertained any after-thought with regard to public affairs, he should
  have preferred England. And, not willing to be behindhand in giving an
  additional touch to the flattering picture which the Emperor had drawn
  of our miserable rock, I even ventured to say that there might,
  perhaps, be circumstances under which St. Helena would not be found
  the worst possible asylum. We might here be under shelter, while the
  tempest was howling in other parts of the world; and we were placed
  beyond the reach of conflicting passions, circumstances every way
  favourable to the chance of a happier futurity. These observations
  arose out of my wish to represent things on their fairest side; I
  extended the horizon to the utmost stretch of my imagination.

  Meanwhile, in order to afford a correct idea of our place of exile and
  the scantiness of its resources, it is only necessary to observe that
  we were this day informed it would be requisite to economise various
  articles of our daily consumption, and, perhaps, even to make a
  temporary sacrifice of some. We were told that the store of coffee was
  rapidly diminishing, and that it might soon be entirely exhausted. For
  a considerable time we have denied ourselves the use of white sugar;
  there was but very little and that very bad, which was reserved
  exclusively for the Emperor’s use; and there is now every prospect of
  this little supply being exhausted before more can be obtained. It is
  the same with various other necessaries. Our island is like a ship at
  sea; our stores are speedily exhausted, if the voyage be prolonged, or
  if we have more mouths to feed than we have the means of supplying.
  Our arrival has produced a scarcity at St. Helena, particularly as
  trading ships are not now suffered to approach the island; we might be
  tempted to believe that they avoid it as a fatal rock, were we not
  aware that the English cruiser carefully keeps them at bay. But, of
  all the privations with which we are threatened, that which most
  surprises us, and which is most of all vexatious, is the want of
  writing paper. We are informed that, during our three months residence
  here, we have consumed all the paper in the island; which proves
  either that St. Helena is in general very scantily supplied with that
  article, or that we have used a most unreasonable quantity. The
  inmates of Longwood must have consumed six or eight times as much as
  all the rest of the colony together.

  In addition to this, our physical and moral privations must be taken
  into account; it must be recollected that we are not in the full
  enjoyment of even the few resources which the island affords, and of
  which arbitrary feeling and caprice in part deprive us; for we are not
  permitted to regale our eyes with the sight of the grass and foliage,
  in places at a certain distance from Longwood. The Admiral had
  promised that the Emperor should be free to ride over the whole of the
  island, and that he would make arrangements with respect to his guard,
  so as to relieve him from all annoyance. It has already been seen how,
  on our second attempt to avail ourselves of it, the Admiral broke this
  kind of engagement; and by his orders an officer insisted on
  accompanying the Emperor in his rides. The Emperor consequently
  renounced the idea of taking any excursion whatever, and we now remain
  cut off from all communication with mankind.

  With respect to our physical existence, our situation is most
  miserable, either through unavoidable circumstances or mismanagement.
  Scarcely any of the provisions are eatable. The wine is execrable; the
  oil unfit for use; the coffee and sugar almost exhausted, and, as I
  have already observed, we have nearly bred a famine in the island. Of
  course, we can endure all these privations, and might contrive to
  exist under many more. But, when it is asserted that we are treated in
  a style of magnificence, when it is declared that we are very well
  off, we are induced to unfold our real situation, and to shew that we
  are destitute of every comfort. And, lest our silence hereafter should
  lead to the inference that we are happy, let it be understood that our
  moral strength may enable us to endure miseries which language would
  be inadequate to express.

               MY SON’S INDISPOSITION.—THE EMPEROR GIVES
                              ME A HORSE.

  2nd.—My son having been, for some time past, troubled with a pain in
  his chest, accompanied by violent palpitation of the heart, I called
  in three surgeons, and they ordered him to be bled.—Bleeding is at
  present the favourite remedy with the English; it is their universal
  panacea. They employ it in all disorders, and sometimes where there is
  no disorder at all. They laughed at the astonishment we evinced at a
  treatment which was altogether new to us.

  About the middle of the day we took a ride in the calash. On our
  return home, the Emperor wished to see a horse that had just been
  purchased for him: he thought him very handsome and well made. He
  tried him, declared that he liked him uncommonly, and then, with the
  most captivating good-nature, made me a present of him. However, I
  could not ride him: he proved vicious, and he was transferred to
  General Gourgaud, who is a much better horseman than I am.

              THE EMPEROR’S PROGRESS IN LEARNING ENGLISH.

  3rd–6th. The 3rd was a terrible day; the rain fell incessantly, and we
  found it impossible to stir out. The weather has continued wet for
  several days in succession. I never imagined that we could have
  contrived to stay for such a length of time within doors. The damp is
  penetrating on every side of our dwelling, and the rain is making its
  way through the roof. The bad weather without doors had an unpleasant
  effect upon us within.—I became very dull; the Emperor was by no means
  well, and I was not better. “What is the matter with you?” said he to
  me, one morning; “you seem quite altered for these few days past. Is
  your mind ailing? Are you conjuring up _dragons_, like Madame de
  Sevigné?”—“Sire,” I replied, “my illness is altogether bodily. The
  state of my eyes afflicts me exceedingly. As for my mind, I know how
  to keep that under the bridle. I can even use the curb, if needful;
  and your Majesty has given me a pair of spurs which will be my last
  and victorious resource.”

  The Emperor devoted three, four, and even five hours at a time to the
  study of English. His progress was really very remarkable; he felt
  this, and was delighted at it. He frequently says that he is indebted
  to me for this conquest, and that he considers it a very important
  one. For my part, however, I can claim no other merit than the method
  which I adopted with regard to the other occupations of the Emperor. I
  first suggested the idea, and then continually reverted to it: and
  when it was once fairly set on foot, I followed up its execution with
  a promptitude and daily regularity which stimulated the Emperor to
  proceed. If any of us happened not to be ready at the moment he wanted
  us, if it was found necessary to postpone any business till the
  following day, he was immediately seized with disgust, and his labours
  were suspended until some circumstance occurred to induce him to renew
  them. “I stand in need of excitement,” said he, in one of these
  transient interruptions, “nothing but the pleasure of advancement can
  bear me through: for, between you and me, it must needs be confessed
  that there is nothing very amusing in all this. Indeed there is very
  little diversion in the whole routine of our present existence.”

  The Emperor still continued to play two or three games at chess before
  dinner; in the afternoons we resumed _reversis_, long abandoned.
  Formerly we had not been regular in paying our debts of honour; and we
  henceforth agreed to pay the sums that we owed to each other into a
  general bank. We began to consider how the money thus accumulated
  should be disposed of. The Emperor asked our opinions, and one
  proposed that the money should be applied to the liberation of the
  prettiest female slave in the island. This idea was universally
  approved; we sat down to play with great spirit, and the first evening
  produced two Napoleons and a half.

                 THE EMPEROR LEARNS THE DEATH OF MURAT.

  7th—8th. The Theban frigate arrived from the Cape, and brought us some
  newspapers. I translated them to the Emperor while we walked in the
  garden. One of these papers brought intelligence of a great
  catastrophe. I read that Murat, having landed in Calabria, with a few
  troops, had been seized and shot. At this unexpected news, the Emperor
  interrupted me by exclaiming, “The Calabrians were more humane, more
  generous, than those who sent me hither.” This was all he said; and
  after a few moments’ silence, as he said nothing, I continued to read.

  Murat, without real judgment, without solid views, without a character
  proportioned to the circumstances in which he was placed, had perished
  in an attempt evidently desperate. It is not impossible that the
  Emperor’s return from Elba may have turned his brain, and inspired him
  with the hope of renewing the prodigy in his own person. Such was the
  miserable end of him who had been one of the most active causes of our
  reverses! In 1814, his courage and intrepidity might have saved us
  from the abyss in which his treachery involved us. He neutralized the
  Viceroy on the Po, and fought against him; whereas, by uniting
  together, they might have forced the passes of the Tyrol, made a
  descent into Germany, and arrived on Bâle and the banks of the Rhine,
  to destroy the rear of the allies and cut off their retreat from
  France.

  The Emperor, while he was at Elba, disdained all communication with
  the King of Naples; but, on departing for France, he wrote to inform
  him that, being about to resume possession of his throne, he felt
  pleasure in declaring to him that all their past differences were at
  an end. He pardoned his late conduct, tendered him his friendship,
  sent some one to sign the guarantee of his States, and recommended him
  to maintain a good understanding with the Austrians, and to content
  himself with merely keeping them in check, in case they should attempt
  to march upon France. Murat, at this moment, inspired with the
  sentiments of his early youth, would receive neither guarantee nor
  signature. He declared that the Emperor’s promise and friendship were
  sufficient for him, and that he would prove he had been more
  unfortunate than guilty. His devotedness and ardour, he added, would
  obtain for him oblivion of the past.

  “Murat,” said the Emperor, “was doomed to be our bane. He ruined us by
  forsaking us, and he ruined us by too warmly espousing our cause. He
  observed no sort of discretion. He himself attacked the Austrians,
  without any reasonable plan and without adequate forces; and he was
  subdued without striking a blow.”

  The Austrians, when rid of Murat, cited his conduct either as a reason
  or as a pretence for attributing ambitious views to Napoleon when he
  again appeared on the scene. They constantly referred to Murat,
  whenever the Emperor made protestations of his moderation.

  Before these unlucky hostilities of the King of Naples, the Emperor
  had already set on foot negotiations with Austria. Other inferior
  states, which I think it unnecessary to mention by name, had signified
  to him that he might rely on their neutrality. Doubtless the fall of
  the King of Naples gave another turn to affairs.

  Endeavours have been made to represent Napoleon as a man of furious
  and implacable temper; but the truth is that he was a stranger to
  revenge, and he never cherished any vindictive feeling, whatever wrong
  he suffered. His anger was usually vented in violent transports, and
  was soon at an end. Those who knew him must be convinced of this fact.
  Murat had scandalously betrayed him; as I have already observed, he
  had twice ruined his prospects, and yet Murat came to seek an asylum
  at Toulon. “I should have taken him with me to Waterloo,” said
  Napoleon; “but such was the patriotic and moral feeling of the French
  army that it was doubtful whether the troops would surmount the
  disgust and horror which they felt for the man who had betrayed and
  lost France. I did not consider myself sufficiently powerful to
  protect him. Yet he might have enabled us to gain the victory. How
  useful would he have been at certain periods of the battle! For what
  was required, at certain moments of the day, to insure our success?—to
  break through three or four English squares; and Murat was admirable
  in such a service as this—he was precisely the man for it. At the head
  of a body of cavalry, no man was ever more resolute, more courageous,
  or more brilliant.

  “As to drawing a parallel,” said the Emperor, ”between the
  circumstances of Napoleon and Murat—between the landing of the former
  in France and the entrance of the latter into the Neapolitan
  territory; no such parallel exists. Murat could have no good argument
  to support his cause, except success; which was purely chimerical, at
  the time and in the manner in which he commenced his enterprise.
  Napoleon was the chosen ruler of a people; he was their legitimate
  sovereign according to modern doctrines. But Murat was not a
  Neapolitan; the Neapolitans had not chosen Murat; how, therefore,
  could it be expected that he should excite any lively interest in his
  favour? Thus his proclamation was totally false, and destitute of
  facts. Ferdinand of Naples could view him in no other light than as an
  instigator of insurrection; he did so, and he treated him accordingly.

  “How different was it with me!” continued the Emperor: “before my
  arrival, one universal sentiment pervaded France, and my proclamation
  on landing was imbued with that sentiment:—every one found that it
  echoed the feelings of his own heart. France was discontented; I was
  her resource. The evil and its remedy were immediately in unison. This
  is the whole secret of that electric movement which is unexampled in
  history. It had its source solely in the nature of things. There was
  no conspiracy, and the impulse was general; not a word was spoken, yet
  a general understanding prevailed throughout the country. Whole towns
  threw themselves at the feet of their deliverer. The first battalion
  which my presence gained over to me immediately placed the whole army
  in my power. I found myself borne on to Paris. The existing government
  and its agency disappeared without effort, like clouds before the sun.
  And yet,” concluded the Emperor, “had I been subdued, had I fallen
  into the hands of my enemies, I was not a mere insurrectionary chief;
  I was a Sovereign acknowledged by all Europe. I had my title, my
  standard, my troops; and I was advancing to wage war upon my enemy.”

                           PORLIER—FERDINAND.

  9th.—In the papers which I was translating to the Emperor, I found the
  history of the Spanish General Porlier, one of the most distinguished
  chiefs of the famous Guerillas. He had made an attempt to excite the
  Spaniards to rise against the tyranny of Ferdinand; but he failed, was
  arrested, and hanged.

  The Emperor said, “I am not in the least surprised that such an
  attempt should have been made in Spain. Those very Spaniards, who
  proved themselves my most inveterate enemies when I invaded their
  country, and who acquired the highest glory by the resistance they
  opposed to me, immediately appealed to me on my return from Elba. They
  had, they said, fought against me as their tyrant; but they now came
  to implore my aid as their deliverer. They required only a small sum
  to emancipate themselves, and to produce in the Peninsula a revolution
  similar to mine. Had I conquered at Waterloo, it was my intention
  immediately to have assisted the Spaniards. This circumstance
  sufficiently explains to me the attempt that has lately been made.
  There is little doubt that it will be renewed. Ferdinand, in his
  madness, may grasp his sceptre as firmly as he will; but one day or
  other it will slip through his fingers like an eel.”

  About four o’clock, I presented to the Emperor the Captain of the
  Theban, who was to sail next day for Europe, and Colonel Macoy, of the
  Ceylon regiment. This brave soldier looked like a mutilated monument;
  he had not only lost one of his legs, but his face was disfigured by a
  sabre-cut across his forehead, and several other scars. He had been
  wounded on the field of battle in Calabria, and made prisoner by
  General Parthonaux. The Emperor received him with particular
  attention; it was easy to see that they felt a mutual sympathy for
  each other. Colonel Macoy had held the rank of Major in the Corsican
  regiment, commanded by the new Governor, whom we expected. The Colonel
  remarked to some person, that he thought the Emperor was very
  ill-treated here; but that he had too high an idea of General Lowe’s
  liberality of mind, not to believe that, having accepted the
  Government of the Island, he would do every thing in his power to
  meliorate our condition.

  The Emperor afterwards rode out on horseback, when we again went up
  the valley, and did not return until about seven o’clock. The Emperor
  then resumed his walk in the garden; the temperature was very mild,
  and the moon shone delightfully. The fine weather had completely
  returned.

               ON EGYPT.—PLAN FOR ALTERING THE COURSE OF
                               THE NILE.

  10th.—The Emperor now begins to make rapid advancement in English;
  and, with the assistance of his dictionary, might manage tolerably
  without me. He was delighted with the decided progress he had made.
  His lesson for to-day was the task of reading in the Encyclopedia
  Britannica the article on the Nile, of which he now and then made
  memorandums to assist him in his dictations to the Grand Marshal. In
  this article the Emperor found a fact related which I had formerly
  mentioned to him, but which he had hitherto considered as an absurd
  story. The great Albuquerque proposed to the King of Portugal to turn
  the course of the Nile previous to its entrance into the valley of
  Egypt, so as to make it fall into the Red Sea, which would have
  rendered Egypt an impassable desert, and made the Cape of Good Hope
  the only channel for the great trade of India. Bruce thinks the
  execution of this gigantic idea not entirely impossible; the Emperor
  was forcibly struck with it.

  About five o’clock the Emperor took an airing in the calash; the drive
  was extremely pleasant, and the circumstance of some trees having been
  cut down has, by forming several circuitous roads, made our original
  space three times as large as before. On our return, we took advantage
  of the fineness of the evening to walk for a long time in the garden:
  the conversation was most interesting. It turned on various important
  subjects, viz. on the variety of religions; on the spirit that had
  given them birth; the ridiculous absurdities with which they were
  mingled; the excesses by which they had been degraded; the objections
  that had been urged against them, &c. The Emperor treated all these
  subjects with his usual superiority.

        UNIFORMITY.—ENNUI.—THE EMPEROR’S SOLITUDE.—CARICATURES.

  11th.—The Emperor read this morning the article entitled Egypt, in the
  Encyclopedia, and made some notes from it which cannot fail to be of
  service to him for his Campaign of Egypt. This circumstance gave him a
  great deal of pleasure; and he repeated several times in the course of
  the day how much he was delighted with the progress he had made. He is
  now sufficiently advanced to read without assistance.

  About four o’clock I accompanied the Emperor into the garden: we
  walked by ourselves for some time, but were afterwards joined by the
  rest of the company. The weather was very mild. The Emperor remarked
  the calmness of our solitude. It was Sunday, and no workmen were to be
  seen. He added that we could not, at least, be accused of dissipation,
  or of the ardent pursuit of pleasure; in fact, it is difficult to
  imagine a state of greater uniformity, or a more complete absence of
  every sort of amusement.

  The Emperor endures this mode of life admirably. He surpasses us all
  in equality and serenity of temper. He says, himself, that it would be
  difficult to be more philosophic and tranquil than he is.—He retires
  to bed at ten o’clock, and does not rise, that is to say, does not go
  out, before five or six o’clock, so that he was never more than four
  hours out of doors; like a prisoner who is led from his cell once a
  day to breathe the fresh air. But then how intense is the occupation
  of each day! how various are the thoughts which occupy his mind during
  his long solitary hours! With regard to mental exertion, the Emperor
  said he felt as capable of bearing it as he had ever been; that he did
  not feel himself worn out or withered in any respect. He was
  astonished himself at the slight impression that had been made on him
  by all the late events in which he had been the principal actor. It
  was like lead which had passed over marble. The spring might have been
  for a moment compressed, but it had not been broken, and had risen
  again with all its elasticity. He did not think any one in the world
  knew better than himself how to yield to necessity; this, he said, was
  the real triumph of reason and strength of mind.

  The hour for our ride had now arrived. As the Emperor was going to
  meet the calash, he happened to see little Hortense, Madame Bertrand’s
  daughter, whom he is very fond of. He called her to him, caressed her
  two or three times, and took her out in the carriage along with little
  Tristan de Montholon. During the drive, the Grand Marshal, who had
  been looking over the papers, gave an account of some bons-mots and
  caricatures he had found among them. One possessed a good deal of
  point. The picture consisted of two actions; one represented Napoleon
  giving to the Princess of Hasfield, with directions to commit it to
  the flames, the letter whose disappearance saved her husband;
  underneath was written, _Tyrannical Act of an Usurper_. The companion
  was quite of another character. We described to the Emperor a great
  number of the caricatures with which we had been inundated after the
  restoration. Some of them afforded him great amusement. One in
  particular made him smile: it referred to a change of dynasty.

  The Emperor observed that, if caricatures sometimes avenge misfortune,
  they form a continual annoyance to power. “I think I have had my share
  of them,” said he. He then desired us to describe some of those which
  had been made upon him, and very much approved of one as being in good
  taste. It was a sketch representing George III. on the coast of
  England, throwing an enormous beet-root, in a great passion, at the
  head of Napoleon, who was on the opposite shore, and saying, “Go, and
  be made sugar.”

                        THE EMPEROR’S LONG WALK.

  12th.—Fine weather had now fairly set in. About four o’clock the
  Emperor walked in the garden. The temperature was delightful, and we
  all acknowledged that it was like one of our finest evenings in
  Europe. We had enjoyed nothing equal to it since we had been on the
  island. The Emperor ordered the calash; and by way of a change,
  instead of driving along by the gum-trees, to get into the road
  leading to the Grand Marshal’s house, he wished to take the road which
  encircles the upper hollow of our favourite valley, and to gain, if
  possible, the spot on which is situated the residence of Miss Mason,
  and which is on the opposite side, facing Longwood. The Emperor
  invited Madame Bertrand to take a drive in the calash, in which Madame
  de Montholon and myself were already seated: the rest of our party
  followed on horseback, so that we were now all assembled together. At
  a few paces from Madame Bertrand’s, at the military post, which is
  established near the house, the ground was very steep and uneven; the
  horses refused to advance, and we were obliged to alight from the
  calash. The barrier was scarcely wide enough to allow the carriage to
  pass; but the English soldiers came to our assistance, and in a moment
  pushed it through by main force. However, when we had reached the
  hollow of the valley, we found walking so agreeable that the Emperor
  wished to continue it; and, after a short time, he ordered the
  carriage to be driven along the road as far as the gate of Miss
  Mason’s house, while we proceeded with our walk in the valley. The
  evening was really most delightful; the shades of night were beginning
  to overspread the sky, but the moon shone brilliantly. Our walk
  reminded us of those strolls which we had been accustomed to enjoy on
  fine summer evenings, in the neighbourhood of our country residences
  in Europe.

  The calash had now returned; but the Emperor declined getting into it.
  He directed that it should wait at Madame Bertrand’s door; but when
  the Emperor got there, he chose to walk on to Longwood, where he
  arrived very much fatigued. He had walked nearly six miles, which is a
  great deal for him, who never was accustomed to walk at any period of
  his life.

             BAD TEMPERATURE OF ST. HELENA.—OBSERVATION ON
                      THE SPIRIT OF THIS JOURNAL.

  13th—16th. I have already observed that there is no regular course of
  seasons at St. Helena, but merely irregular successions of good and
  bad weather. It would be difficult to find four words to express any
  deviation from our accustomed routine, during these four days. And
  here I take the opportunity of observing, once for all, that if, in
  the course of my journal, the events of several days are occasionally
  found combined in one article, it is because I have cancelled a
  portion of the notes relating to each day separately. I have been
  induced to do this from various motives. Sometimes my notes appeared
  to me too puerile; sometimes, on the other hand, they seemed to be too
  serious, and calculated for a more distant period; or occasionally
  they consisted of personalities, and I make it a rule studiously to
  avoid every thing of that kind. If, in spite of all my care, any
  offensive personal allusions have escaped me, it can only be when I
  have been led to them by the essential object of my journal; namely,
  to describe the character of the Emperor. Even then, I may reflect,
  for my own satisfaction, that these personalities relate only to
  public characters, and refer to facts already circulated in the world.

  I am, however, perfectly well aware that the task I have undertaken
  may subject me to many inconveniences; but I consider it as a sacred
  duty, and shall endeavour to fulfil it to the best of my abilities,
  happen what will.

  THE EMPEROR’S VIEWS OF FRENCH POLITICS.

  17th.—At six o’clock in the morning, the Emperor mounted his horse,
  and we rode round the park, commencing in the neighbourhood of our
  valley, and proceeding as far as the road leading from the camp to the
  Grand Marshal’s residence. A party of about 150 or 200 sailors,
  belonging to the Northumberland, who were daily employed in removing
  planks of wood or stones for the service of Longwood or the camp,
  ranged themselves in a line fronting Marshal Bertrand’s house, while
  the Emperor passed by. The Emperor spoke to the officers, and smiled
  complacently on his old ship-mates; they appeared delighted at seeing
  him.

  I have already mentioned that we occasionally received parcels of
  newspapers from Europe, the contents of which occupied our attention,
  and occasioned the Emperor to draw some lively and animated pictures.
  Conversing to-day on the subject of the intelligence we had recently
  received, the Emperor observed that the condition of France was by no
  means improved. “The Bourbons,” he repeated, “have now no other
  resource than severity. Four months have already elapsed; the Allied
  forces are about to be withdrawn, and none but half measures have been
  taken. The affair has been badly managed. A government can exist only
  by its principle. The principle of the French government evidently is
  to return to old maxims; and it should do this openly. In present
  circumstances, the Chambers, above all, will be fatal; they will
  inspire the King with false confidence, and will have no weight with
  the nation. The King will soon be deprived of all means of
  communication with them. They will no longer follow the same religion,
  nor speak the same language. No individual will henceforth have a
  right to undeceive the people with regard to any absurdities that may
  be propagated; even if it should be wished to make them believe that
  all the springs of water are poisoned, and that trains of gunpowder
  are laid under ground.” The Emperor concluded by observing that there
  would be some juridical executions, and an extreme desire of
  re-action, which would be sufficiently strong to irritate, but not to
  subdue.

  As to Europe, the Emperor considered it to be as violently agitated as
  it had ever been. The powers of Europe had destroyed France, but she
  might one day revive through commotions arising among the people of
  different nations, whom the policy of the sovereigns was calculated to
  alienate; the glory of France might also be restored through a
  misunderstanding among the Allied powers themselves, which would
  probably ensue.

  As to our own personal affairs, they could only be improved through
  the medium of England; and she could only be induced to favour us by
  political interests, a change in her ministers or her sovereign, or
  the sentiment of national glory excited by the torrent of public
  opinion. As for political interests, there were circumstances which
  might affect them; the change of individuals depends on accidents;
  finally, with respect to the sentiment of national glory, so easy to
  be understood, the present ministry had disavowed it, but another
  might not be insensible to it.

                 PICTURE OF DOMESTIC HAPPINESS DRAWN BY
              THE EMPEROR.—TWO YOUNG LADIES OF THE ISLAND.

  18th.—The Emperor sent for me about ten o’clock; he had just returned
  home. Some one had informed me that he had been out shooting; but he
  said that he had not. He rode out on horseback as early as six
  o’clock; but he gave orders that _His Excellency’s_ slumbers should
  not be disturbed. We set to work with the English lesson. Breakfast
  was served up; it was most detestable; and I could not refrain from
  making the observation. He pitied me for making so bad a meal, and
  added that it was certainly necessary to have a good appetite to make
  a repast on such fare. We continued our lesson until nearly one
  o’clock, when the excessive heat obliged us to desist, and take a
  little repose.

  About five the Emperor went to walk in the garden. He began to draw a
  sketch of the happiness of a private man in easy circumstances,
  peacefully enjoying life in his native province, in the house and
  surrounded by the lands which he had inherited from his forefathers.
  Certainly nothing could be more philosophic. We could not refrain from
  smiling at the tranquil domestic picture, and some of us got our ears
  pinched for our pains. “Felicity of this kind,” continued the Emperor,
  “is now unknown in France except by tradition. The Revolution has
  destroyed it. The old families have been deprived of this happiness,
  and the new ones have not yet been long enough established in the
  enjoyment of it. The picture which I have sketched has now no real
  existence.”—He observed that, to be driven from our native home, from
  the fields in which we had roamed in childhood, to possess no paternal
  abode, was in reality to be deprived of a country. Some one here
  remarked that the man who had been robbed of the home which he had
  created for himself after the storm had blown over; who was driven
  from the house in which he had dwelt with his wife, and which had been
  the birth-place of his children; might truly say that he had lost a
  second country. How many individuals are reduced to that extremity;
  and what vicissitudes the present age has produced!

  We seated ourselves in the calash, and took our accustomed airing.
  During dinner, the conversation turned on two young ladies, residents
  of the island: the one tall, handsome, and very fascinating; the other
  not so pretty, but perfectly well bred, and pleasing in her deportment
  and manners. Opinions were divided respecting them. The Emperor, who
  was only acquainted with the one first described, declared himself in
  her favour. Some one remarked that, if he were to see the second, he
  would not be induced to change his mind. The Emperor then wished to
  know the gentleman’s own opinion respecting the ladies, and he
  replied, that he was an admirer of the second. This seemed rather
  contradictory, and the Emperor requested him to explain himself.
  “Why,” said he, “if I wished to purchase a slave, I should certainly
  fix on the first; but if I thought I should derive any happiness from
  becoming a slave myself, I should address myself to the second.”—“That
  is to say,” resumed the Emperor, quickly, “that you have no very high
  opinion of my taste?”—“Not so, Sire, but I suspect your Majesty’s
  views and mine would be different.” The Emperor smiled, and said
  nothing more on the subject.

  19th.—The Emperor rode on horseback very early this morning; it was
  scarcely six o’clock when he went out. I was quite ready; for I had
  ordered some one to call me; and the Emperor was astonished to see me
  so active. We strolled about the park at random, and returned about
  nine: the sun was already beginning to be warm.

  About four o’clock the Emperor wished to take his English lesson; but
  he was not very well. He said that every thing had gone wrong with him
  to-day; and that nothing had done him any good. His walk in the garden
  did not restore him; he was not well at dinner-time. He did not play
  his usual number of games at chess; but retired, indisposed, after the
  first game.

        THE EMPEROR’S WORKS IN THE ISLAND OF ELBA.—PREDILECTION
                   OF THE ALGERINES FOR THE EMPEROR.

  20th.—The weather had been extremely bad. The Emperor had been rather
  unwell the whole of the night, but felt himself much better in the
  morning. He did not leave his room before five o’clock. About six we
  took advantage of a gleam of fine weather to drive round the park in
  the calash. The horses which have been provided for us are vicious;
  they shy at the first object that comes in their way, and become
  restive. They stood still several times during our drive. The rain,
  indeed, had rendered the roads very heavy, and at one time it required
  all our efforts to obviate the necessity of returning on foot. The
  Grand Marshal and General Gourgaud were in one instance obliged to
  alight and put their shoulders to the wheel. At length, after a great
  deal of trouble we reached home. The conversation, during our drive,
  turned on the Island of Elba. The Emperor spoke of the roads he had
  made, and the houses he had built, which the best painters of Italy
  begged, as a favour, to be permitted to adorn with their works.

  The Emperor observed that his flag had become the first in the
  Mediterranean. It was held sacred, he said, by the Barbary ships, who
  usually made presents to the Elba Captains, telling them that they
  were paying the debt of Moscow. The Grand Marshal told us that some
  Barbary ships, having anchored off the Island of Elba, had caused
  great alarm among the inhabitants, who questioned the pirates with
  regard to their intentions, and ended by asking them plainly whether
  they came with any hostile views.—“Against the Great Napoleon!” said
  the Algerines: “Oh! never ... we do not wage war against God!”

  Whenever the flag of the Island of Elba entered any of the ports of
  the Mediterranean, Leghorn excepted, it was received with loud
  acclamations: all the national feeling seemed to return. The crews of
  some French ships from Britanny and Flanders, which touched at the
  Island of Elba, testified the same sentiment.

  “Every thing is judged by comparison in this world,” said the Emperor;
  “the Island of Elba, which, a year ago, was thought so disagreeable,
  is a paradise compared to St. Helena. As for this island, it may set
  all future regret at defiance.”

                        PIONTKOWSKI.—CARICATURE.

  21st—22nd. The Emperor continued to rise early and ride out on
  horseback, in the park and among the gum-trees. He rode only at a
  walking pace, but this light exercise was of advantage to him, as it
  enabled him to enjoy the fresh air. He returned with a better
  appetite, and pursued the occupations of the day with greater spirit.
  He breakfasted in the garden, under some trees which had been twined
  together to afford him a shade. One morning, as he was sitting down to
  breakfast, he perceived at a distance the Pole Piontkowski, and sent
  for him to breakfast with him. He always takes pleasure in conversing
  with him whenever he meets him.

  Piontkowski, with whose origin we are not very well acquainted, came
  to the Island of Elba, and obtained permission to serve as a private
  in the Guards. On the Emperor’s return from Elba, he had gained the
  rank of lieutenant. When we departed from Paris, he received
  permission to follow us; and we left him at Plymouth, among those who
  were separated from us by order of the English ministers. Piontkowski,
  having more fidelity, or more address, than his comrades, obtained
  leave to come to St. Helena. The Emperor had never known, and never
  spoken to him, till he came here.

  Piontkowski was, indeed, equally unknown to us all. The English were
  surprised that we did not give him a warmer greeting on his arrival.
  Some individuals, who seized all opportunities of saying any thing to
  our disadvantage, wrote to England that we had received Piontkowski
  very ill. This story was totally false: but it furnished the English
  ministerial prints with a subject on which to exercise their usual
  courtesy and wit. It was asserted that the Emperor had beaten
  Piontkowski; and I heard of a caricature in which Napoleon was seizing
  the Polish officer in his talons, while I had leaped upon him to
  devour him; and it was only by a stick being thrust between my teeth,
  by the keeper of the beasts, that I was prevented from biting a
  mouthful out of his shoulder. Such were the elegant accounts that were
  given of us.

                    THE EMPEROR’S RETURN FROM ELBA.

  24th.—After dinner, while we were taking our coffee, the Emperor
  observed that, about this time last year, he quitted the Island of
  Elba. The Grand Marshal informed him that it was on the 26th of
  February and on a Sunday. “Sire,” said he, “you directed mass to be
  performed at an earlier hour than usual, that you might have the more
  time for issuing the necessary orders.”

  They sailed in the afternoon, and next morning at ten o’clock they
  were still within sight, to the great anxiety of those who were
  interested in their success.

  The Emperor entered into conversation on this subject, and was, for
  upwards of an hour, engaged in describing the details of that event,
  which is unparalleled in history, both for the boldness of the
  enterprise, and the miracle of its execution. I shall insert in
  another part of my journal, the particulars which I collected on this
  subject.

CAMPAIGNS OF ITALY AND EGYPT.—THE EMPEROR’S OPINION OF THE GREAT FRENCH
  POETS.—TRAGEDIES BY LATE WRITERS.—HECTOR.—THE ETATS DE BLOIS.—TALMA.

  25th—28th. Our days were for the most part very much alike; if they
  seemed long in detail, they were rapidly shortened in a retrospective
  view. They were without character or interest, and left only imperfect
  recollections behind. In English he went on gradually improving. The
  Emperor confessed that he had felt a moment of disgust; his _furia
  Francese_ had, he said, at one time, given way; but he added that I
  had reanimated him by means of a plan which he considered more certain
  and infallible than any other—that of reading and analyzing a single
  page over and over again until it was thoroughly learnt. The
  grammatical rules were explained by the way. In this manner, there is
  not a moment lost to study and memory. The progress at first appears
  slow, the learner seems to advance but little in his studies; but by
  the time he has come to the fiftieth page, he is astonished to find
  that he knows the language. We had added a page of Telemachus to the
  rest of our lesson, and we found the benefit of it. By this time,
  however, the Emperor, though he had only had twenty or twenty-five
  complete lessons, could understand any book; and would have been able
  to make himself understood in writing. He did not comprehend all that
  was said, it is true; but, as he observed, nothing could be concealed
  from him for the future, and this was a great thing—this was a decided
  victory.

  The Campaign of Egypt was completed with the assistance of Bertrand,
  as far as the want of materials would permit. The Emperor now
  commenced, with another of the gentlemen, a new and very important
  period; namely—from his departure from Fontainebleau, up to his return
  to Paris and his second abdication. He possessed no document relating
  to these rapid events; but it was that very rapidity which induced me
  to entreat him to employ his memory in recording circumstances which
  the hurry of events or party spirit might enfeeble or distort.

  The Emperor also employed himself very frequently with me, in revising
  the different chapters of the Campaign of Italy; this was generally
  done immediately before dinner. He had directed me to arrange each
  chapter in a regular and uniform manner; to mark out the proper
  divisions of the paragraphs, and to note down and collect the
  illustrative articles. This he called the digestive business of an
  editor. “And your interest is concerned in it,” said he to me one day,
  with an air of kindness which affected me; “henceforward it is your
  property: the Campaign of Italy shall bear your name, and the Campaign
  of Egypt that of Bertrand. I intend that it shall add at once to your
  fortune and to your fame. There will be at least a hundred thousand
  francs in your pocket, and your name will last as long as the
  remembrance of my battles.”

  With regard to our evenings, the _reversis_ had been relinquished a
  second time; we could not continue it long. After the second or third
  round, the cards were abandoned for conversation. We resumed our
  readings: our stock of novels was exhausted, and plays occupied our
  attention for the future, tragedies in particular. The Emperor is
  uncommonly fond of analyzing them, which he does in a singular mode of
  reasoning, and with great taste. He remembers an immense quantity of
  poetry, which he learned when he was eighteen years old, at which
  time, he says, he knew much more than he does at present. The Emperor
  is delighted with Racine, in whom he finds a profusion of beauties. He
  greatly admires Corneille, but thinks very little of Voltaire, who, he
  says, is full of bombast and tinsel: always incorrect; unacquainted
  either with men or things, with truth or the sublimity of the passions
  of mankind.

  At one of the _couchers_ at St. Cloud the Emperor analyzed a piece
  which had just been brought out; it was _Hector_ by _Luce de
  Lancival_: this piece pleased him very much; it possessed warmth and
  energy of character. He called it a _head-quarter_ piece; and said
  that a soldier would be better prepared to meet the enemy after seeing
  or reading it. He added that it would be well if there were a greater
  number of plays written in the same spirit.—Then, adverting to those
  dramatic productions called _drames_ in French, and which he termed
  _waiting-maids’ tragedies_, he said they would not bear more than one
  representation, after which they suffered a gradual diminution of
  interest. A good tragedy, on the contrary, gains upon us every day.
  The higher walk of tragedy, continued he, is the school of great men;
  it is the duty of sovereigns to encourage and disseminate a taste for
  it. Nor is it necessary, he said, to be a poet, to be enabled to judge
  of the merits of a tragedy; it is sufficient to be acquainted with men
  and things, to possess an elevated mind, and to be a statesman. Then,
  becoming gradually more animated, he added, with enthusiasm,—”Tragedy
  fires the soul, elevates the heart, and is calculated to generate
  heroes. Considered under this point of view, perhaps, France owes to
  Corneille a part of her great actions; and, gentlemen, _had he lived
  in my time, I would have made him a prince_.”

  On a similar occasion, he analyzed and condemned the _Etats de Blois_,
  which had just been presented for the first time at the theatre of the
  Court; and perceiving among the company present the Arch-Treasurer
  Lebrun, who was distinguished for his literary acquirements, he asked
  his opinion of it. Lebrun, who was undoubtedly in the author’s
  interest, contented himself with remarking that the subject was a bad
  one. “That,” replied the Emperor, “was M. Renouard’s first fault; he
  chose it himself, it was not forced upon him. Besides, there is no
  subject, however bad, which great talent cannot turn to some account,
  and Corneille would still have been himself even in one like this. As
  for M. Renouard, he has totally failed. He has shewn no other talent
  but that of versification; every thing else is bad, very bad; his
  conception, his details, his result, are altogether defective. He
  violates the truth of history; his characters are false, and their
  political tendency is dangerous, and perhaps prejudicial. This is an
  additional proof of what, however, is very well known, that there is a
  wide difference between the reading and the representation of a play.
  I thought at first that this piece might have been allowed to pass; it
  was not until this evening that I perceived its improprieties. Of
  these, the praises lavished on the Bourbons are the least; the
  declamations against the Revolutionists are much worse. M. Renouard
  has made the Chief of the Sixteen the Capuchine Chabot of the
  Convention. There is matter in his piece to inflame every party and
  every passion: were I to allow it to be represented in Paris, I should
  probably hear of half a hundred people murdering one another in the
  pit. Besides, the author has made Henri IV. a true Philinte, and the
  Duke de Guise a Figaro, which is by far too great an outrage on
  history. The duke of Guise was one of the most distinguished men of
  his time; and if he had but ventured, he might, at that time, have
  established the fourth dynasty. Besides, he was related to the
  Empress; he was a Prince of the house of Austria, with whom we are in
  friendship, and whose Ambassador was present this evening at the
  representation. The author has, in more than one instance, shewn a
  strange disregard of propriety.” The Emperor afterwards said that he
  felt more than ever fixed in the determination he had formed not to
  permit any new tragedy to be played on the public stage before it had
  undergone a trial at the theatre of the Court. He therefore prohibited
  the representation of the _Etats de Blois_. It is worthy of remark,
  that, since the restoration of the King, this piece was revived with
  the greatest pomp, and supported by all the favour which the
  prohibition of the Emperor would naturally procure for it. But,
  notwithstanding all this, it failed; so correct was the judgment which
  Napoleon had passed upon it.

  Talma, the celebrated tragedian, had frequent interviews with the
  Emperor, who greatly admired his talent, and rewarded him
  magnificently. When the First Consul became Emperor, it was reported
  all over Paris, that he had Talma to give him lessons in attitude and
  costume. The Emperor, who always knew every thing that was said
  against him, rallied Talma one day on the subject, and, finding him
  look quite disconcerted and confounded,—“You are wrong,“ said he, “I
  certainly could not have employed myself better, if I had had leisure
  for it.” On the contrary, it was the Emperor who gave Talma lessons in
  his art. “Racine,” said he to him, “has loaded his character of
  Orestes with imbecilities, and you only add to their extravagance. In
  the _Mort de Pompée_, you do not play Cæsar like a hero; in
  Britannicus, you do not play Nero like a tyrant.” Every one knows the
  corrections which Talma afterwards made in his performances of these
  celebrated characters.

CONTRACTORS, &C. DURING THE REVOLUTION.—THE EMPEROR’S CREDIT ON HIS
  RETURN FROM ELBA.—HIS REPUTATION IN THE PUBLIC OFFICES AS A RIGID
  INVESTIGATOR.—MINISTERS OF FINANCE AND THE TREASURY.—CADASTRE.

  29th.—At six o’clock, the Emperor, having finished his daily
  occupations, walked in the garden. We then took a drive in the calash:
  it was quite dark, and rained very fast when we returned.

  After dinner, while coffee was served round, which we took without
  rising from our seats at the dining-table, the conversation turned on
  what were termed Agents daring the Revolution, and the great fortunes
  which they acquired. The Emperor knew the name, the family, the
  profession, and the character, of every one of these men.

  Scarcely had Napoleon attained the Consulship when he became engaged
  in a dispute with the celebrated Madame Recamier, whose father held a
  situation in the Post-office department. Napoleon, on first taking the
  reins of Government, was obliged to sign in confidence a great number
  of lists; but he soon established the most rigid inspection in every
  department. He discovered that a correspondence with the Chouans was
  going on under the connivance of M. Bernard, the father of Madame
  Recamier. He was immediately dismissed, and narrowly escaped being
  brought to a trial, by which he would doubtless have been condemned to
  death. His daughter flew to the First Consul, and, at her
  solicitation, Napoleon exempted M. Bernard from taking his trial, but
  was resolute with respect to his dismissal. Madame Recamier, who had
  been accustomed to ask for every thing, and to obtain every thing,
  would be satisfied with nothing less than the re-instatement of her
  father. Such were the manners of those times. The severity of the
  First Consul excited loud animadversions; it was a thing quite
  unusual. Madame Recamier and her party, which was very numerous, never
  forgave him.

  The contractors and agents were the class which, above all, excited
  the uneasiness of the new Supreme Magistrate, who called them the
  scourge and the plague of the nation. The Emperor observed that all
  France would not have satisfied the ambition of those of Paris alone;
  that, when he came to the head of affairs, they constituted an
  absolute power; and that they were most dangerous to the state, whose
  springs were obstructed by their intrigues, joined to those of their
  numerous dependents.—In truth, said he, they could never be regarded
  as any thing but sources of corruption and ruin, like Jews and
  usurers. They had disgraced the Directory, and they wished in like
  manner to control the Consulate. It may be said that at that period
  they enjoyed the highest rank and influence in society.

  “One of the principal retrograde steps,” said the Emperor, “which I
  took, with the view of restoring the past state and manners of
  society, was to throw all this false lustre back into the crowd. I
  never would raise any of this class to distinction: of all
  aristocracies this appeared to me the worst.” The Emperor rendered to
  Lebrun the justice of having especially confirmed him in this
  principle. “The party always disliked me for this,” said the Emperor;
  “but they were still less inclined to pardon the rigid enquiry which I
  instituted into their accounts with the Government.”

  The Emperor said that in business of this sort he turned the service
  of his Council of State to the best account. He used to appoint a
  committee of four or five members of the Council, men of integrity and
  intelligence. They made their report to him, and, if the case required
  farther investigation, they wrote at the bottom of the report:
  _Referred to the Grand Judge to enforce the laws_. The individuals
  implicated generally endeavoured to compromise the affair, when it
  arrived at this point. They would disgorge, one, two, three, or four
  millions, rather than suffer the business to be legally investigated.
  The Emperor was well aware, that all these facts were misrepresented
  in the different circles of the capital, that they produced him many
  enemies, and drew down upon him the reproach of arbitrariness and
  tyranny. But he thus acquitted a great duty to the mass of society,
  who must have been grateful to him for the measures he adopted towards
  these bloodsuckers of the public.

  “Men are always the same,” said the Emperor: “from the time of
  Pharamond downwards, contractors have always acted thus, and people
  have always acted in the same way towards them. But at no period of
  the monarchy were they ever attacked in so legal a form, or assailed
  so energetically and openly as by me. Even among the contractors
  themselves, the few individuals who possessed honesty and integrity
  found in this extreme severity a new guarantee for their own conduct.
  A remarkable instance of this occurred after my return from Elba. Some
  houses in London and Amsterdam secretly negotiated with me a loan of
  from 80 to 100,000,000, at a profit of seven or eight per cent. The
  net sum which was deposited in the Treasury of Paris, was paid to them
  by _rentes_ on the great book at fifty, which were then distributed
  among the public at fifty-six or fifty-seven.”

  This resource, so useful in the crisis in which the Emperor was
  placed, and which must at the same time have been so satisfactory and
  flattering to himself personally, proves the real opinion that was
  entertained of Napoleon in Europe, and the confidence which he
  inspired. This negotiation, which was unknown at the time, explains
  whence the Emperor derived the financial resources of which he
  suddenly found himself possessed on his return from Elba; which was a
  great subject of conjecture at the time.

  The Emperor himself said that he enjoyed singular reputation among the
  heads of offices and accountants. The examination of accounts was a
  thing which he very well understood. “The circumstance that first
  gained me reputation, in this way, was that, while balancing a yearly
  account during the Consulate, I discovered an error of 2,000,000 to
  the disadvantage of the Republic. M. Dufresne, who was then chief of
  the treasury, and who was a perfectly honest man, at first would not
  believe that the error existed. However, it was an affair of figures;
  the fact could not be denied. At the treasury several months were
  occupied in endeavouring to discover the error. It was at length found
  in an account of the contractor Seguin, who immediately acknowledged
  it, on being shewn the accounts, and restored the money, saying it was
  a mistake.”

  On another occasion as the Emperor was examining the accounts of the
  pay of the garrison of Paris, he observed an article of sixty and some
  odd thousand francs set down to a detachment which had never been in
  the capital. The minister made a note of the error, merely from
  complaisance, but was convinced in his own mind that the Emperor was
  mistaken. Napoleon however proved to be right, and the sum was
  restored.

  The Emperor regarded as a matter of the highest importance the
  separation of the departments of finance and the treasury, both for
  the sake of keeping the business of the two departments distinct, and
  for enabling them to become mutual checks to each other. The minister
  of the treasury, under a sovereign like Napoleon, was the most
  important man in the empire; not merely as a minister of the treasury,
  but as comptroller-general. All the accounts of the empire came under
  his examination, and he was thus enabled to detect every kind of
  peculation and abuse, and to make them known to the sovereign; and
  communications of this nature were daily made. To special
  appropriations Napoleon also attached the greatest importance, as
  having been among the happiest springs of his administration.

  Speaking of the _cadastre_, he said that, according to the plan which
  he had drawn up, it might be considered as the real constitution of
  the Empire. It was the true guarantee of property, and the security
  for the independence of each individual; for, the tax being once fixed
  and established by the legislature, each individual might make his own
  arrangements, and had nothing to fear from the authority or arbitrary
  conduct of assessors, which is always the point most sensibly felt,
  and the surest to enforce submission. During this conversation, the
  Emperor gave his opinion of the talents of Messrs. Gaudin, Mollien,
  and Louis, as well as most of his other Ministers and Councillors of
  State. He concluded by observing that he had succeeded in creating a
  system of administration doubtless the purest and most energetic in
  Europe; and that he himself had the details so much at his command
  that he was sure he now could, merely with the help of the Moniteur,
  trace the complete history of the financial transactions of the Empire
  during his reign.

  March 1st.—To-day two vessels arrived from the Cape. One, the
  Wellesley, a seventy-four, had another ship which had been taken to
  pieces in her hold. Both were India built of teak-wood, three-fourths
  cheaper than they could have been built in England. This is an
  excellent kind of wood; and ships made of it are said to last much
  longer than European-built ships; though hitherto it has been
  complained that they are not such good sailers. However, it is not
  improbable that this teak wood may produce a revolution in the
  materials and construction of English ships.

  2nd.—The China fleet is arrived. Several vessels successively entered
  the road in the course of the day, and many others are within sight.
  This is a sort of festival and harvest for the people of St. Helena.
  The money which these transient visitors circulate in the Island
  constitutes a chief portion of the revenues of the inhabitants.

  At five o’clock the Emperor proceeded to the garden, and went on foot
  as far as an opening between some of the hills, whence we could
  discern several vessels in full sail, making for the Island. The last
  ship that arrived from the Cape had brought a phaeton for the Emperor.
  He wished to try it this evening, and he got into it, accompanied by
  the Grand Marshal, and rode round the park. He, however, thinks that
  this kind of equipage is both useless and ridiculous, in present
  circumstances. After dinner the Emperor felt much fatigued; he has
  been indisposed for some days, and he retired this evening at an early
  hour.

                        THE INVASION OF ENGLAND.

  3rd.—The Emperor sent for me at two o’clock; I found him shaving. He
  told me that I beheld in him a man who was on the point of death, on
  the brink of the grave. He added that I must have been aware that he
  was ill, because he must have waked me often during the night. I had,
  indeed, heard him cough and sneeze continually: he had a violent cold
  in his head, which he had caught in consequence of staying out too
  long in the damp air on the preceding evening. He stated his
  determination, in future, always to return in doors at six o’clock.
  After he had dressed, he sat down to his English lesson; but he did
  not continue at it long, for his head ached severely. He told me to
  sit down by him, and made me talk for more than two hours about what I
  had observed in London during my emigration. Among other things, he
  inquired, “Were the English very much afraid of my invasion? What was
  the general opinion at the time?”—“Sire,“ I replied, “I cannot inform
  you: I had then returned to France. But in the saloons of Paris we
  laughed heartily at the idea of an invasion of England; and the
  English who were there at the time did so too. It was said that even
  Brunet laughed at the scheme, and that you had caused him to be
  imprisoned because he had been insolent enough in one of his parts, to
  set some nut-shells afloat in a tub of water, which he called
  manœuvring his little flotilla.” “Well!” replied the Emperor, “You
  might laugh in Paris, but Pitt did not laugh in London. He soon
  comprehended the extent of the danger, and therefore threw a coalition
  on my shoulders at the moment when I was raising my arm to strike.
  Never was the English oligarchy exposed to greater danger.

  “I had taken measures to ensure the possibility of my landing. I had
  the best army in the world; I need only say it was the army of
  Austerlitz. In four days I should have been in London; I should have
  entered the English capital, not as a conqueror but as a liberator. I
  should have been another William III.; but I would have acted with
  greater generosity and disinterestedness. The discipline of my army
  was perfect. My troops would have behaved in London just as they would
  in Paris. No sacrifices, not even contributions, would have been
  exacted from the English. We should have presented ourselves to them,
  not as conquerors but as brothers, who came to restore to them their
  rights and liberties. I would have assembled the citizens, and
  directed them to labour in the task of their regeneration; because the
  English had already preceded us in political legislation; I would have
  declared that our only wish was to be able to rejoice in the happiness
  and prosperity of the English people; and to these professions I would
  have strictly adhered. In the course of a few months, the two nations,
  which had been such determined enemies, would have thenceforward
  composed only one people, identified in principles, maxims and
  interests. I should have departed from England, in order to effect
  from south to north, under republican colours (for I was then First
  Consul) the regeneration of Europe, which, at a later period, I was on
  the point of effecting from north to south under monarchical forms.
  Both systems were equally good, since both would have been attended
  with the same result, and would have been carried into execution with
  firmness, moderation, and good faith. How many ills that are now
  endured, and how many that are yet to be experienced, would not
  unhappy Europe have escaped! Never was a project so favourable to the
  interests of civilization conceived with more disinterested
  intentions, or so near being carried into execution. It is a
  remarkable fact that the obstacles which occasioned my failure were
  not the work of men, but all proceeded from the elements. In the
  south, the sea frustrated my plans; the burning of Moscow, the snow
  and the winter, completed my ruin in the north. Thus water, air, and
  fire, all nature and nature alone, was hostile to the universal
  regeneration which nature herself called for!... The problems of
  Providence are insoluble!”

  After a few moment’s silence, he reverted to the subject of the
  English invasion. “It was supposed,” said he, “that my scheme was
  merely a vain threat, because it did not appear that I possessed any
  reasonable means of attempting its execution. But I had laid my plans
  deeply, and without being observed. I had dispersed all our French
  ships; and the English were sailing after them to different parts of
  the world. Our ships were to return suddenly and at the same time, and
  to assemble in a mass along the French coasts. I should have had
  seventy or eighty French or Spanish ships in the Channel; and I
  calculated that I should continue master of it for two months. Three
  or four thousand small vessels were to be ready at a signal. A hundred
  thousand men were every day drilled in embarking and landing, as a
  part of their exercise. They were full of ardour, and eager for the
  enterprise, which was very popular with the French, and was supported
  by the wishes of a great number of the English. After landing my
  troops, I calculated upon only one pitched battle, the result of which
  could not be doubtful; and victory would have brought us to London.
  The nature of the country would not admit of a war of monœuvring.
  My conduct would have done the rest. The people of England groaned
  under the yoke of an oligarchy. On feeling that their pride had not
  been humbled, they would have ranged themselves on our side. We should
  have been considered only as Allies come to effect their deliverance.
  We should have presented ourselves with the magical words of liberty
  and equality,” &c.

  After adverting to a great number of the minor details of the plan,
  which were all admirable, and remarking how very near execution it had
  been, he abruptly stopped, and said, “Let us go out, and take a turn.”

  We walked for some time; it had been raining for three days, but now
  the weather was perfectly fine. The Emperor, not forgetting his
  resolution to be in-doors always by six o’clock, immediately ordered
  the calash; took a drive, and returned home in good time. My son
  followed on horse-back; it was the first time he had enjoyed such an
  honour. He acquitted himself very well, and the Emperor complimented
  him on the occasion.

  The Emperor continued unwell, and retired to rest very early.

                           THE CHINESE FLEET.

  4th.—To-day the Emperor received some captains of the China fleet. He
  conversed a long time with them respecting their trade, the facility
  of their intercourse with the Chinese, the manners of that people, &c.
  The ships which trade to China are from 14 to 1500 tons’ burthen,
  nearly equal to sixty-fours; and they draw from twenty-two to
  twenty-three feet of water: they are laden almost exclusively with
  tea. One of those just arrived had nearly 1500 tons on board. The
  cargoes of the six ships which came into the road last night are
  valued at about sixty millions; and as they will be subject to a duty
  of 100 per cent., on their arrival in England, 120 millions will thus
  at once be thrown into circulation in Europe.

  Europeans are allowed very little liberty at Canton. Their residence
  is chiefly limited to the suburbs. They are treated with the greatest
  contempt by the Chinese, who assume an air of great superiority, and
  conduct themselves in a very arbitrary manner. The Chinese are very
  intelligent, industrious, and active; but they are great thieves and
  extremely treacherous. They transact all business in the European
  languages, which they speak with facility.

  The arrival of fleets at St. Helena is a circumstance equally pleasing
  to the crews and the inhabitants of the Island. The latter sell their
  merchandize and purchase provisions; the seamen, on their part, are
  enabled to set foot on land, and to refresh themselves. This state of
  things usually continues for a fortnight or three weeks; but, on the
  present occasion, the Admiral, to the great disappointment of every
  body, limited the period of refreshment to two days only for the first
  two ships that had anchored off the town. The others were ordered to
  remain under sail, and to come up to the town in succession, two by
  two. It must be supposed that he has received very strict orders, or
  is under some very great apprehension, of which we are not aware.

  The Emperor walked for some time in the garden before he got into his
  calash. Among the trees in the neighbourhood, we perceived some
  officers newly arrived at the Island, who were endeavouring to get a
  peep at the Emperor, the sight of whom seemed to be an object of great
  importance to them.

ETIQUETTE OF THE EMPEROR’S COURT.—CIRCUMSTANCE THAT TOOK PLACE AT
  TARARE.—OFFICERS OF STATE.—CHAMBERLAINS.—UNEQUALLED SPLENDOUR OF THE
  COURT OF THE TUILERIES.—ADMIRABLE REGULATION OF THE PALACE.—THE
  EMPEROR’S LEVEES.—DINING IN STATE.—THE COURT AND THE CITY.

  5th.—To-day the Emperor conversed a great deal about this Court and
  the etiquette observed in it. The following is the substance of what
  fell from him on this subject.

  At the period of the Revolution, the Courts of Spain and Naples still
  imitated the ceremony and grandeur of Louis XIV., mingled with the
  pomp and exaggeration of the Castilians and Moors. They were insipid
  and ridiculous. The court of St. Petersburg had assumed the tone and
  forms of the drawing-room; that of Vienna had become quite
  citizen-like; and there no longer remained any vestige of the wit, the
  grace, and the good taste of the Court of Versailles.

  When, therefore, Napoleon attained the sovereign power, he found a
  clear road before him, and he had an opportunity of forming a Court
  according to his own taste. He was desirous of adopting a rational
  medium by accommodating the dignity of the throne to modern customs,
  and, particularly, by making the creation of a Court contribute to
  improve the manners of the great, and promote the industry of the mass
  of the people. It certainly was no easy matter to re-construct a
  throne on the very spot where a reigning monarch had been judicially
  executed, and where the people had constitutionally sworn hatred to
  kings. It was not easy to restore dignities, titles, and decorations,
  among a people who for the space of fifteen years had waged a war of
  proscription against them. Napoleon, however, who seemed always to
  possess the power of effecting what he wished, perhaps because he had
  the art of wishing for what was just and proper, after a great
  struggle, surmounted all these difficulties. When he became Emperor,
  he created a class of nobility, and formed a Court. Victory seemed all
  on a sudden to do her utmost to consolidate and shed a lustre over
  this new order of things. All Europe acknowledged the Emperor; and at
  one period it might have been said that all the Courts of the
  Continent had flocked to Paris to add to the splendour of the
  Tuileries, which was the most brilliant and numerous Court ever seen.
  There was a continued series of parties, balls, and entertainments;
  and the Court was always distinguished for extraordinary magnificence
  and grandeur. The person of the sovereign was alone remarkable for
  extreme simplicity, which, indeed, was a characteristic that served to
  distinguish him amidst the surrounding splendour. He encouraged all
  this magnificence, he said, from motives of policy, and not because it
  accorded with his own taste. It was calculated to encourage
  manufactures and national industry. The ceremonies and festivities
  which took place on the marriage of the Empress and the birth of the
  King of Rome, far surpassed any which had preceded them, and probably
  will never again be equalled.

  The Emperor endeavoured to establish, in his foreign relations, every
  thing that was calculated to place him in harmony with the other
  Courts of Europe; but at home he constantly tried to adapt old forms
  to new manners.

  He established the _levers_ and _couchers_ of the old kings of France;
  but with him they were merely nominal, and did not exist in reality,
  as in former times. Instead of being occupied in the most minute and
  indelicate details of the toilet, these hours under the Emperor were,
  in fact, appropriated to receiving in the morning and dismissing in
  the evening, such persons of his household as had to receive orders
  directly from him, and who were privileged to pay their court to him
  at those times.

  The Emperor also established special presentations to his person and
  admission to his Court: but instead of making noble birth the only
  means of securing these honours, the title for obtaining them was
  founded solely on the combined bases of fortune, influence, and public
  services.

  Napoleon, moreover, created titles, the qualifications for which were
  nearly similar to those of the old feudal system. These titles,
  however, possessed no real value, and were established for an object
  purely national. Those which were unaccompanied by any prerogatives or
  privileges might be enjoyed by persons of any rank or profession, and
  were bestowed as rewards for all kinds of services. The Emperor
  observed that abroad they had the useful effect of appearing to be an
  approximation to the old manners of Europe, while at the same time
  they served as a toy for amusing the vanities of many individuals at
  home; “for,” said he, “how many superior men are children oftener than
  once a day!”

  The Emperor revived decorations of honour, and distributed crosses and
  ribands. But instead of confining them to particular and exclusive
  classes, he extended them to society in general as rewards for every
  kind of talent and public service. By a happy privilege, perhaps
  peculiar to Napoleon, it happened that the value of these honours was
  enhanced in proportion to the number distributed. He estimated that he
  had conferred about 25,000 decorations of the Legion of Honour; and
  the desire to obtain the honour, he said, increased until it became a
  kind of _mania_.

  After the battle of Wagram, he sent the decoration of the Legion of
  Honour to the Archduke Charles, and, by a refinement in compliment,
  peculiar to Napoleon, he sent him merely the silver cross, which was
  worn by the private soldiers.

  The Emperor said that it was only by acting strictly and voluntarily
  in conformity with these maxims that he had become the real national
  monarch; and an adherence to the same course would have rendered the
  fourth dynasty the truly constitutional one. Of these facts, said he,
  the people of the lowest rank frequently evinced an instinctive
  knowledge.

  The Emperor related the following anecdote:—On returning from his
  coronation in Italy, as he approached the environs of Lyons, he found
  all the population assembled on the roads to see him pass, and he took
  a fancy to ascend the hill of Tarare alone. He gave orders that nobody
  should follow him, and, mingling with the crowd, he accosted an old
  woman, and asked what all the bustle was about. She replied, that the
  Emperor was expected. After some little conversation he said to her:
  “My good woman, formerly you had the tyrant Capet; now you have the
  tyrant Napoleon; what have you gained by the change?” The force of
  this argument disconcerted the old woman for a moment; but she
  immediately recollected herself, and replied, “Pardon me, sir, there
  is a great difference. We ourselves chose this one; but we got the
  other by chance.” “The old woman was right,” said the Emperor, “and
  she exhibited more instinctive good sense than many men who are
  possessed of great information and talent.”

  The Emperor surrounded himself with great Crown officers. He
  established a numerous household of chamberlains, equerries, &c. He
  selected persons to fill these offices indiscriminately from among
  those whom the Revolution had elevated, and from the ancient families
  which it had ruined. The former considered themselves as standing on
  ground which they had acquired; the latter on that which they thought
  they had recovered. The Emperor had in view, by this mixture of
  persons, the extinction of hatred and the amalgamation of parties. He
  observed, however, that it was easy to perceive a variety of manners.
  The individuals belonging to the ancient families performed their
  duties with the greatest courtesy and assiduity. A Madame de
  Montmorency would have stooped down to tie the Empress’s shoes; a lady
  of the new school would have hesitated to do this, lest she should be
  taken for a real waiting-woman; but Madame de Montmorency had no such
  apprehension. These posts of honour were for the most part without
  emolument; they were even attended with expense. But they brought the
  individuals who filled them daily under the eye of the Sovereign—of an
  all-powerful Sovereign, the source of honour and emoluments; and who
  had declared that he would not have the lowest officer in his
  household solicit a favour from any one but himself.

  At the time of his marriage with the Empress Maria-Louisa, the Emperor
  made an extensive recruit of chamberlains from among the highest ranks
  of the old aristocracy; this he did with the view of proving to Europe
  that there existed but one party in France, and rallying round the
  Empress those individuals whose names must have been familiar to her.
  It is understood that the Emperor even hesitated whether or not to
  select the lady of honour from that class; but his fear lest the
  Empress, with whose character he was unacquainted, might be imbued
  with prejudices respecting birth, that might too much elate the old
  party, induced him to make another choice.

  From this moment until the period of our disasters, the most ancient
  and illustrious families eagerly solicited places in the household of
  the Emperor; and how could it be otherwise? The Emperor governed the
  world: he had raised France and the French people above the level of
  other nations. Power, glory, constituted his retinue. Happy were they
  who inhaled the atmosphere of the Imperial Court. To be immediately
  connected with the Emperor’s person, furnished, both abroad and at
  home, a title to consideration, homage, and respect.

  Upon the Restoration, a royalist, who had preserved himself pure, and
  in whose sight I had found grace, said to me, in the most serious
  tone, (for, what a difference in ideas does not difference of party
  produce!) that with my name, and the openness of conduct I had
  maintained, I ought not to despair of still obtaining a situation near
  the King, or in the household of some of the Princes or Princesses.
  How greatly was he astonished when I replied:—“My friend, I have
  rendered that impossible: I have served the most powerful master upon
  earth: I cannot in future, without degradation, stand in the same
  relation to any other. Know, that when we conveyed the orders of the
  Emperor to a distance, into foreign Courts, wearing his uniform, we
  considered ourselves, and were every where treated, as upon an
  equality with princes. He has presented to us the spectacle of not
  fewer than seven Kings waiting in his saloons, in the midst of us, and
  with us. On his marriage, four Queens bore the robe of the Empress, of
  whom, moreover, one of us was the Gentleman Usher, another the
  Equerry. Believe then, my friend, that a noble ambition is perfectly
  satisfied with such honours.”

  Besides, the magnificence and splendour that composed this unexampled
  Court, rested on a system and a regularity of administration that has
  excited the astonishment and admiration of those who have searched
  amid its wrecks. The Emperor himself inspected the accounts several
  times in the course of the year. All his mansions were found to be
  repaired and decorated: they contained nearly forty millions in
  household furniture, besides four millions in plate. If he had enjoyed
  a few years of peace, imagination can scarcely fix limits, he said, to
  what he would have accomplished.

  The Emperor said he had conceived an excellent idea, which he was much
  grieved at not having put in execution: it was to have commissioned
  some persons to collect the most important petitions. “They should
  have named, every day,” said he, “three or four individuals from the
  provinces, who would have been admitted to my levee, and have
  explained their business to me in person; I would have discussed it
  with them immediately, and administered justice to them without
  delay.”

  I observed to the Emperor that the Commission he had created at a very
  early period, under the name of “Commission of Petitions,” came very
  near the idea in question, and was, in fact, productive of much good.
  I was President of it on his return from Elba, and in the first month
  I had already done justice to more than four thousand petitions. “It
  is true,” I observed, “that circumstances originally, and custom
  afterwards, had never allowed this establishment to enjoy the most
  valuable prerogative with which its organization had been endowed,
  that which would undoubtedly have produced the greatest effect on
  public opinion; namely to present to him officially, at his great
  audience on Sunday, the result of the week’s labours.” But the nature
  of things, the constant expeditions of the Emperor, and, above all,
  the jealousy of the Ministers, had concurred to deprive the Commission
  of this high privilege.

  The Emperor said, also, he was sorry he had not established it as part
  of the etiquette of the Court that all persons who had been presented,
  females particularly, who had any claim to obtain an audience of him,
  should have the unquestioned right of entering the ante-chamber. The
  Emperor, passing through it several times in the day, might have taken
  the opportunity to satisfy some of their requests; and might in this
  manner have spared the refusal of audiences, or the loss of time
  occasioned by them. The Emperor had hesitated for some time, he said,
  about re-establishing the _grand couvert_ of the kings of France, that
  is, the dining in public, every Sunday, of the whole Imperial family.
  He asked our opinion of it. We differed. Some approved of it,
  represented this family spectacle as beneficial to public morals, and
  fitted to produce the best effects on public spirit; besides, said
  they, it afforded means for every individual to see his Sovereign.
  Others opposed it, objecting that this ceremony involved something of
  divine right and feudality, of ignorance and servility, which had no
  place in our habits or the modern dignity of them. They might go to
  see the Sovereign at the church or the theatre: there they joined at
  least in the performance of his religious duties, or took part in his
  pleasures; but to go to see him eat was only to bring ridicule on both
  parties. The sovereignty having now become, as the Emperor had so well
  said, a magistracy, should only be seen in full activity; conferring
  favours, redressing injuries, transacting business, reviewing armies,
  and above all, divested of the infirmities and the wants of human
  nature, &c.... Its utility, its benefits, should form its new charm:
  the image of the sovereign should be present continually and
  unlooked-for, like Providence. Such was the new school:—such had been
  ours.

  “Well,” said the Emperor, “it may be true that the circumstances of
  the time should have limited this ceremony to the Imperial heir, and
  only during his youth; for he was the child of the whole nation; he
  ought to become thenceforth the object of the sentiments and the sight
  of all.”

  On his return from Elba, the Emperor said he had an idea of dining
  every Sunday in the _Galerie de Diane_ with four or five hundred
  guests: this, said he, would undoubtedly have produced a great effect
  on the public, particularly at the time of the _Champ de Mai_, on the
  assembling of the Deputies from the departments at Paris; but the
  rapidity and the importance of business prevented it. Besides, he was
  apprehensive, perhaps, that there might have been observed in this
  measure too great an affectation of popularity, and that his enemies
  abroad might give it the semblance of fear on his part.

  It is the custom, said the Emperor, to talk of the influence of the
  tone and manners of the Court upon those of a nation; he was far from
  having brought about any such result; but it was the fault of
  circumstances and of several unperceived combinations: he had
  reflected much on the subject, and he thought that it would have been
  accomplished in time.

  “The Court,” he continued, “taken collectively, does not exert this
  influence; it is only because its elements, those who compose it, go
  to communicate, each in his own sphere of action, that which they have
  collected from the common source; the tone of the Court, then, is not
  infused into a whole nation, but through intermediate societies. Now,
  we had no such societies, nor could we yet have them. Those delightful
  assemblies, where one enjoys so fully the advantages of civilization,
  suddenly disappear at the approach of revolutions, and are
  re-established but slowly, when the tempests dissipate. The
  indispensable bases of society are indolence and luxury; but we were
  all still in a state of agitation, and great fortunes were not yet
  firmly established. A great number of theatres, a multitude of public
  establishments, moreover, presented pleasures more ready, less
  constrained, and more exciting. The women of the day, taken
  collectively, were young; they liked better to be out, and to shew
  themselves in public, than to remain at home and compose a narrower
  circle. But they would have grown old, and with a little time and
  tranquillity, every thing would have fallen into its natural course.
  And then again,” he observed, “it would perhaps be an error to judge
  of a modern Court by the remembrance of the old ones. The power
  certainly resided in the old Courts; they said, the Court and the
  City;—at the present day, if we desired to speak correctly, we were
  obliged to say the City and the Court. The feudal lords, since they
  have lost their power, seek to make themselves amends in their
  enjoyments. Sovereigns themselves seemed to be, for the future,
  subjected to this law: the throne, with our liberal ideas, insensibly
  ceased to be a signory, and became purely a magistracy; the Prince
  having only a simple practical character to sustain, always
  sufficiently dull and tedious in the long run, must seek to withdraw
  from it, to come as a mere citizen, and take his share in the
  pleasures of society.”

  Among a great number of new measures projected by the Emperor for a
  more tranquil futurity, his favourite idea had been, peace being
  obtained and repose secured, to devote his life to purifying the
  administration and to local meliorations; to be occupied in perpetual
  tours in the departments: he would have visited, not hurried over;
  sojourned, not posted through: he would have used his own horses,
  would have been surrounded by the Empress, the King of Rome, his whole
  Court. At the same time he wished this great equipage not to be
  burdensome to any, but rather a benefit to all: a suite of tapestry
  hangings and all the other appendages, following the train, would have
  furnished and decorated his places of rest. The other persons of the
  Court, he said, would have been quartered on the citizens, who would
  have looked upon their guests as a benefit rather than a burden,
  because they would always have been the sure means of their acquiring
  some advantage or some favours. “It is thus,” he continued, “that I
  should have been able in every place to prevent frauds, punish
  misappropriations, direct edifices, bridges, roads; drain marshes,
  fertilize lands, &c.—If Heaven had then,” he continued, “granted me a
  few years, I would certainly have made Paris the capital of the world,
  and all France a real fairy-land.” He often repeated these last words:
  how many people have already said this, or will repeat it after him!

              SET OF CHESSMEN FROM CHINA.—PRESENTATION OF
                    THE CAPTAINS OF THE CHINA FLEET.

  6th.—The Emperor mounted his horse at seven o’clock: he told me to
  call my son to accompany us; this was a great favour. During our ride
  the Emperor dismounted five or six times to observe, with the help of
  a glass, some vessels that were in sight: he ascertained one to be a
  Dutchman; the three colours are always, with us, an object of lively
  emotion. On one of these occasions, the most mettlesome horse in the
  company got loose, and occasioned a long pursuit; my son came up with
  him, brought him back in triumph, and the Emperor observed that in a
  tournament this would be a victory.

  On our return, the Emperor breakfasted within doors: he detained us
  all.

  Before and after breakfast, the Emperor conversed with me in private
  on serious matters which I cannot trust to paper.

  The heat was become excessive: he retired. It was half-past four when
  he sent for me again; he was finishing dressing. The Doctor brought
  him a set of chessmen, which he had been buying on board the vessels
  from China; the Emperor had wished to have one. For this he had paid
  thirty Napoleons: it was an object of great admiration with the worthy
  Doctor; and, at the same time, nothing seemed more ridiculous to the
  Emperor. All the pieces, instead of resembling ours, were coarse and
  clumsy images of the figures indicated by the names: thus, a knight
  was armed at all points, and the castle rested on an enormous
  elephant, &c. The Emperor could not make use of them, saying,
  pleasantly, that every piece would require a crane to move it.

  In the mean time many officers and others employed in the China fleet
  were sauntering in the garden. Their curiosity had led them some hours
  before to our dwelling; we had been literally invaded in our chambers.
  One said, the pride of his life would be to have seen Napoleon:
  another, that he durst not appear in his wife’s presence in England,
  if he could not tell her that he had been fortunate enough to behold
  his features; another, that he would willingly forego all the profits
  of his voyage for a single glance, &c.

  The Emperor caused them to be admitted: it would be difficult to
  describe their satisfaction and joy: they had not ventured to expect
  or to hope for so much. The Emperor, according to custom, proposed
  many questions to them concerning China, its commerce, its
  inhabitants: their revenues, their manners; the missionaries, &c. He
  detained them above half an hour, before he dismissed them. At their
  departure we described to him the enthusiasm we had witnessed in these
  officers, and repeated all that had fallen from them relative to him.
  “I believe it,” said he; “you do not perceive that they are our
  friends. All that you have observed in them belongs to the commonalty
  of England—the natural enemies, perhaps without giving themselves
  credit for it, of their old and insolent Aristocracy.”

  At dinner the Emperor ate little; he was unwell: after coffee, he
  attempted a game at chess, but he was too much inclined to sleep, and
  retired almost immediately.

                                A TRICK.

  7th.—The Emperor mounted his horse at a very early hour; he told me
  again to call my son to accompany him. The evening before, the Emperor
  seeing him on horseback, had asked me if I did not make him learn to
  groom his horse; that nothing was more useful; that he had given
  particular orders for it in the military school at St. Germain. I was
  vexed that such an idea had escaped me; I seized it eagerly, and my
  son still more so. He was at this moment on a horse that no one had
  touched but himself. The Emperor, whom I informed of it, seemed
  pleased, and condescended to make him go through a sort of little
  examination. Our ride lasted nearly two hours and a half, rambling all
  the time about Longwood.

  At our return the Emperor had breakfast in the garden, to which he
  detained us all.

  A short time before dinner, I presented myself as usual in the
  drawing-room: the Emperor was playing at chess with the Grand Marshal.
  The valet-de-chambre in waiting at the door of the room brought me a
  letter, on which was written _Very urgent_. Out of respect to the
  Emperor, I went aside to read it: it was in English; it stated that I
  had composed an excellent work; that, nevertheless, it was not without
  faults; that if I would correct them in a new edition, no doubt the
  work would be more valuable for it; and then went on to pray that God
  would keep me in his gracious and holy protection. Such a letter
  excited my astonishment, and made me rather angry; the colour rushed
  to my face: I did not, at first, give myself time to consider the
  writing. In reading it over again I recognised the hand,
  notwithstanding its being much better written than usual, and I could
  not help laughing a good deal to myself. But the Emperor, who cast a
  side-glance at me, asked me from whom the letter came that was given
  to me. I replied, that it was a paper that had caused a very different
  feeling in me at first from that which it would leave permanently. I
  said this with so much simplicity, the mystification had been so
  complete, that he laughed till tears came in his eyes. The letter was
  from him; the pupil had a mind to jest with his master, and try his
  powers at his expense. I carefully preserve this letter; the gaiety,
  the style, and the whole circumstance, render it more valuable to me
  than any diploma the Emperor could have put into my hands when he was
  in power.

AN OPPORTUNITY FOR THE EMPEROR TO MAKE USE OF HIS ENGLISH.—ON
  MEDICINE.—CORVISART.—DEFINITION.—ON THE PLAGUE.—MEDICAL PRACTICE IN
  BABYLON.

  8th.—The Emperor had had no sleep during the night; he had, therefore,
  amused himself with writing me another letter in English; he sent it
  to me sealed; I corrected the errors in it, and sent him an answer
  also in English, by the return of the courier. He understood me
  perfectly: this convinced him of the progress he had made, and
  satisfied him that for the future he could, strictly speaking,
  correspond in his new tongue.

  For nearly a fortnight past, General Gourgaud had been unwell; his
  indisposition had turned to a very malignant dysentery, which
  occasioned some alarm. The Admiral now sent him the Surgeon of the
  Northumberland (Dr. Warden); the Emperor detained this gentleman to
  dinner. During the repast, and for a long time afterwards, the
  conversation was exclusively on medicine; sometimes lively, sometimes
  serious and profound. The Emperor was in good spirits: he talked with
  great volubility; he overwhelmed the Doctor with questions, and with
  ingenious and subtle arguments, that perplexed him much: the latter
  was much dazzled by this brilliancy; so that, after dinner, he took me
  aside to ask me how it happened that the Emperor was so well informed
  on these matters: he did not doubt but they were his usual topics of
  conversation. “Not more than any thing else,” I said, with truth; “but
  there are few subjects with which the Emperor is unacquainted, and he
  treats them all in a new and engaging manner.”

  The Emperor has no faith in medicine, or its remedies, of which he
  makes no use. “Doctor,” said he, “our body is a machine for the
  purpose of life: it is organized to that end—that is its nature. Leave
  the life there at its ease, let it take care of itself, it will do
  better than if you paralyze it by loading it with medicines. It is
  like a well-made watch, destined to go for a certain time; the
  watch-maker has not the power of opening it, he cannot meddle with it
  but at random, and with his eyes bandaged. For one who, by dint of
  racking it with his ill-formed instruments, succeeds in doing it any
  good, how many blockheads destroy it altogether!”

  The Emperor, then, did not admit the utility of medicine but in a few
  cases, in disorders that were known and distinctly ascertained by time
  and experience: and he then compared the art of the physician with
  that of the engineer in regular sieges, where the maxims of Vauban,
  and the rules of experience, have brought all the chances within the
  scope of known laws. In accordance, too, with these principles, the
  Emperor had conceived the idea of a law which should have allowed to
  the mass of medical practitioners in France the use of simple
  medicines only, and forbidden them to employ _heroic_ remedies, that
  is, such as may cause death, unless they made three or four thousand
  francs, at least, by their profession; which, said he, afforded
  grounds for supposing them to have education, judgment, and a certain
  public reputation. “This measure,” said he, “was certainly just and
  beneficent; but in my circumstances it was unseasonable: information
  was not yet sufficiently diffused. No doubt the mass of the people
  would have seen only an act of tyranny in the law, which,
  nevertheless, would have rescued them from their executioners.”

  The Emperor had frequently attacked the celebrated Corvisart, his
  physician, upon the subject of medicine. The latter, waving the honour
  of the profession and of his colleagues, confessed that he entertained
  nearly the same opinions, and even acted upon them. He was a great
  enemy to medicines, and employed them very sparingly: the Empress
  Maria-Louisa, suffering much during her pregnancy, and teazing him for
  relief, he artfully gave her some pills composed of crumb of bread,
  which she observed did her a great deal of good.

  The Emperor said he had brought Corvisart to admit that medicine was
  a resource available only for the few; that it might be of some
  benefit to the rich, but that it was the scourge of the poor. “Now,
  do you not believe,” said the Emperor, “seeing the uncertainty of
  the art itself, and the ignorance of those who practise it, that its
  effects, taken in the aggregate, are more fatal than useful to the
  people?” Corvisart assented without hesitation. “But have you never
  killed any body yourself?” continued the Emperor, “that is to say,
  have not some patients died evidently in consequence of your
  prescriptions?”—“Undoubtedly,” replied Corvisart; “but I ought no
  more to let that weigh upon my conscience than would your Majesty,
  if you had caused the destruction of some troops, not from having
  made a bad movement, but because their march was impeded by a ditch
  or a precipice, which it was impossible for you to be aware of.”

  Thence the Emperor went on to some problems and definitions, which he
  proposed to the Doctor. “What is life?” said he to him; “when and how
  do we receive it? Is that any thing but mystery yet?” Then he defined
  harmless madness to be a chasm or incoherence of judgment between just
  ideas and the application of them: an insane man eats grapes in a
  vineyard that is not his own; and, in reply to the expostulations of
  the owner says:—“Here are two of us; the sun sees both of us;
  therefore I have a right to eat the grapes.” The dangerous madman was
  he in whom this chasm or incoherence of judgment occurred between
  ideas and actions: it was he who cut off the head of a sleeping man,
  and concealed himself behind a hedge, to enjoy the perplexity of the
  dead body when it should awake.

  The Emperor next asked the Doctor what was the difference between
  sleep and death; and answered the question himself by saying that
  sleep was the momentary suspension of the faculties within the power
  of our volition; and death the lasting suspension, not only of these
  faculties, but also of those over which our will has no control.

  From that, the conversation turned upon the plague. The Emperor
  maintained that it was taken by inspiration as well as by contact: he
  said that it was rendered most dangerous and most extensively
  propagated, by fear: its principal seat was in the imagination. In
  Egypt, all those in whom that (the imagination) was affected,
  perished. The most prudent remedy was moral courage. He had touched
  with impunity, he said, some infected persons at Jaffa, and had saved
  many lives by deceiving the soldiers, during two months, as to the
  nature of the disease: it was not the plague, they were told, but a
  fever accompanied with ulcers. Moreover, he had observed that the best
  means to preserve the army from it were to keep them on the march, and
  give them, plenty of exercise: fatigue, and the employment of the mind
  upon other subjects, were found the surest protection.[32]

Footnote 32:

    It is mentioned in the Memoirs of M. Larre, as a phenomenon, or at
    least something remarkable, that the pressure of circumstances
    during the retreat from Saint-Jean-d’Acre, having rendered it
    necessary to reduce the food of the sick to some plain thin
    biscuits, and their dressings to some brackish water, these invalids
    traversed sixty leagues of Desert without accidents, and with so
    much advantage that the greater part found themselves well when they
    arrived in Egypt. He attributes this species of prodigy to the
    exercise, direct or indirect, to the dry heat of the Desert, and
    above all to the joy of returning to a country which had become a
    sort of new home to the soldiers.

  The Emperor also said to the Doctor—“If Hippocrates were on a sudden
  to enter your hospital, would he not be much astonished? would he
  adopt your maxims and your methods? would he not find fault with you?
  On your part should you understand his language? should you at all
  comprehend each other?”—He concluded by pleasantly extolling the
  practice of medicine in Babylon, where the patients were exposed at
  the door, and the relations, sitting near them, stopped the passengers
  to enquire if they had ever been afflicted in a similar way, and what
  had cured them. One had at least the certainty, said he, of escaping
  all those whose remedies had killed them.

  9th.—I was breakfasting with the Emperor, after our English lesson,
  when I received a letter from my wife that filled me with joy and
  gratitude. She said, that neither fear, fatigue, nor distance, could
  prevent her joining me; that, separated from me, she could experience
  no happiness, and that she was only waiting for the proper season.
  Admirable devotion! superior to all that we have manifested here,
  inasmuch as it is exerted with a perfect knowledge of all its
  consequences. I cannot think that in England they will have the
  cruelty to refuse her: what does she solicit? favours, interest? No;
  she begs to share the lot of an exile on a solitary rock; to fulfil a
  duty, and to testify her affection!—How far was I from forming a just
  estimate of the hearts and minds of those who detained us! Madame de
  Las Cases found herself constantly repulsed: sometimes under various
  pretexts; sometimes even without an answer. At last, and as if to rid
  himself of her importunity, Lord Bathurst caused her to be informed,
  in the beginning of 1817, that she should be permitted to go to the
  Cape of Good Hope (500 leagues beyond St. Helena), whence “if the
  Governor of St. Helena (Sir Hudson Lowe) sees no objection, she shall
  be allowed to join her husband.”

  I leave, without comment, this specimen of ill-timed pleasantry to the
  consideration of any one who has the feelings of a man. This letter
  came by the Owen Glendower frigate, which arrived from the Cape, and
  brought us at the same time the European papers to December 4.

TRIAL OF NEY.—THE EMPEROR’S CARRIAGE TAKEN AT WATERLOO.—THE INTERVIEW AT
  DRESDEN.—ON THE CAPRICE OF WOMEN.

  10th—12th. The weather had now changed to those miserable pelting
  rains which scarcely permitted us to walk in the garden; fortunately
  we had newspapers to occupy our time. At length I had the satisfaction
  of seeing the Emperor read them without assistance.

  These papers contained many details relating to the trial of Marshal
  Ney, which was at that time in progress. With reference to this, the
  Emperor said that the horizon was gloomy; that the unfortunate Marshal
  was certainly in great danger; but that we must not however despair.
  “The King undoubtedly believes himself quite sure of the Peers,” said
  he; “they are certainly violent enough, firmly resolved, highly
  incensed; but for all that, suppose the slightest incident, some new
  rumour, or I know not what: then you would see, in spite of all the
  efforts of the King, and of what they believe to be the interest of
  their cause, the Chamber of Peers would, all on a sudden, take it into
  their heads not to find him guilty; and thus Ney may be saved.”

  This led the Emperor to dilate upon our volatile, fickle, and
  changeable disposition. “All the French,” said he, “are turbulent, and
  disposed to rail; but they are not addicted to seditious combinations,
  still less to actual conspiracy. Their levity is so natural to them,
  their changes so sudden, that it may be said to be a national
  dishonour. They are mere weathercocks, the sport of the winds, it is
  true; but this vice is with them free from the calculations of
  interest, and that is their best excuse. But we must only be
  understood to speak here of the mass, of that which constitutes public
  opinion; for individual examples to the contrary have swarmed in our
  latter times, that exhibit certain classes in the most disgusting
  state of meanness.”

  It was this knowledge of the national character, the Emperor
  continued, that had always prevented his having recourse to the High
  Court. It was instituted by our Constitution; the Council of State had
  even decreed its organization; but the Emperor felt all the danger of
  the bustle and agitation that such spectacles always produce. “Such a
  proceeding,” he said, “was in reality an appeal to the public, and was
  always highly injurious to authority, when the accused gained the
  cause. A Ministry in England might sustain, without inconvenience, the
  effects of a decision against it under such circumstances; but a
  sovereign like me, and situated as I was, could not have suffered it
  without the utmost danger to public affairs: for this reason, I
  preferred having recourse to the ordinary tribunals. Malevolence often
  started objections to this; nevertheless, among all those whom it was
  pleased to call victims, which of them, I ask you, has retained his
  popularity in our late struggles? They have taken care to justify me:
  all of them are faded in the national estimation.”

  The Emperor had reserved one article in the papers, that he might have
  my assistance in reading it; it referred to the carriage he lost at
  Waterloo: the great number of technical expressions rendered it too
  difficult for him. The editor gave a very circumstantial account of
  this carriage, with a minutely detailed inventory of all its contents;
  to this he sometimes added the most frivolous reflections. In
  mentioning a small liquor-case, he observed that the Emperor never
  forgot _himself_, but took care to want nothing; in noticing certain
  elegant appendages to his dressing-case, he added that it might be
  seen he made his toilet _comme il faut_ (the expression was in
  French). These last words produced a sensation in the Emperor, which
  certainly would not have been excited by a more important subject.
  “How!” said he to me, with a mixture of disgust and pain; “these
  people of England, then, take me for some wild animal; have they
  really been led so far as this? or their ——, who is a kind of Ox Apis,
  as I am assured, does he not pay that attention to his toilet that is
  considered proper by every person of any education among us?”

  It is certain that I should have been a good deal puzzled to explain
  to him the writer’s meaning. Besides, it is known that the Emperor, of
  all people in the world, set the least value on his personal
  convenience, and studied it the least; but, on the other hand, and he
  acknowledged it with pleasure, there never was one for whom the
  devotion and attention of servants had been so diligent in that
  particular. As he ate at very irregular hours, they contrived, in the
  course of his journeys and campaigns, to have his dinner, similar to
  what he was accustomed to at the Tuileries, always ready within a few
  paces of him. He had but to speak, and he was instantly served; he
  himself said it was magic. During fifteen years he constantly drank a
  particular sort of Burgundy (Chambertin), which he liked and believed
  to be wholesome for him: he found this wine provided for him
  throughout Germany, in the remotest part of Spain, everywhere, even at
  Moscow; and it may truly be said that art, luxury, the refinement of
  elegance and good taste, contended around him, as if without his
  knowledge, to afford him gratification. The English journalists,
  therefore, described a multitude of objects that were undoubtedly in
  the carriage; but of which the Emperor had not the slightest notion:
  not that he was at all surprised at it, he observed.

  The bad weather which continued to confine us within doors, had no
  influence on the disposition of the Emperor, who at this particular
  time seemed more unreserved and talked more than usual. He spoke at
  length, and with the most minute details, of the famous interview at
  Dresden. The following are extracts from his conversation:—

  This was the epoch when the power of Napoleon was at its height: he
  there appeared as the _king of kings_; he was actually obliged to
  observe that some attention ought to be paid to the Emperor of
  Austria, his father-in-law. Neither this Sovereign nor the King of
  Prussia had any household establishment attending them; Alexander had
  none either at Tilsit or Erfurt. There, as at Dresden, they lived at
  Napoleon’s table.—“These Courts,” said the Emperor, “were paltry and
  vulgar.” It was he who regulated the etiquette, and took the lead in
  them; he made Francis take precedence of him, to his unbounded
  satisfaction. The luxury and magnificence of Napoleon must have made
  him appear to them like an Asiatic prince: there, as well as at
  Tilsit, he loaded all who came near him with diamonds. We informed him
  that at Dresden he had not a single French soldier about him: and that
  his Court was sometimes not without apprehensions for the safety of
  his person. He could scarcely believe us;—but we assured him that it
  was a fact; that the Saxon body-guard was the only one he had. “It is
  all one,” he said; “I was then in so good a family, with such worthy
  people, that I ran no risk; I was beloved by all; and, at this very
  time, I am sure the good King of Saxony repeats every day a _Pater_
  and an _Ave_ for me.” He added, “I ruined the fortunes of that poor
  Princess Augusta, and I acted very wrong in so doing. Returning from
  Tilsit, I received, at Marienwerder, a chamberlain of the King of
  Saxony, who delivered me a letter from his master; he wrote thus: ‘I
  have just received a letter from the Emperor of Austria, who desires
  my daughter in marriage; I send this to you, that you may inform me
  what answer I ought to return.’—‘I shall be at Dresden in a few
  days,’” was the reply of the Emperor; and, on his arrival, he set his
  face against the match, and prevented it. “I was very wrong,” repeated
  he; “I was fearful the Emperor Francis would withdraw the King of
  Saxony from me: on the contrary, the Princess Augusta would have
  brought over the Emperor Francis to my side, and I should not now have
  been here.”

  At Dresden, Napoleon was much occupied in business, and Maria-Louisa,
  anxious to avail herself of the smallest intervals of leisure to be
  with her husband, scarcely ever went out, lest she should miss them.
  The Emperor Francis, who did nothing, and tired himself all day with
  going about the town, could not at all comprehend this family
  seclusion; he fancied that it was to affect reserve and importance.
  The Empress of Austria endeavoured to prevail on Maria-Louisa to go
  out; she represented to her that her constant assiduity was
  ridiculous. She would willingly have given herself the airs of a
  step-mother with Maria-Louisa, who was not disposed to suffer it,
  their ages being nearly the same. She came frequently in the morning
  to her toilet, ransacking among the luxurious and magnificent objects
  displayed there: she seldom went out empty-handed.

  “The reign of Maria-Louisa was very short,” said the Emperor; “but it
  must have been full of enjoyment for her; she had the world at her
  feet.” One of us took the liberty to ask if the Empress of Austria was
  not the sworn enemy of Maria-Louisa. “Nothing more,” said the Emperor,
  “than a little regular court-hatred; a thorough detestation in the
  heart, but glossed over by daily letters of four pages, full of
  coaxing and tenderness.”

  The Empress of Austria was particularly attentive to Napoleon, and
  took great pains to make much of him while he was present; but no
  sooner was his back turned, than she endeavoured to detach
  Maria-Louisa from him by the most mischievous and malicious
  insinuations; she was vexed that she could not succeed in obtaining
  some influence over her. “She has, however, address and ability,” said
  the Emperor, “and that sufficient to embarrass her husband, who had
  acquired a conviction that she entertained a poor opinion of him. Her
  countenance was agreeable, engaging, and had something very peculiar
  in it; she was a pretty little nun.

  “As to the Emperor Francis, his good-nature is well known, and makes
  him constantly the dupe of the designing. His son will be like him.

  “The King of Prussia, as a private character, is an honourable, good,
  and worthy man; but, in his political capacity, he is naturally
  disposed to yield to necessity: you are his master so long as you have
  power on your side, and your arm is uplifted to strike.

  “As for the Emperor of Russia, he is a man infinitely superior to
  these: he possesses wit, grace, information; he is fascinating, but he
  is not to be trusted: he is devoid of candour, a true _Greek of the
  Lower Empire_. At the same time he is not without ideology, real or
  assumed:—after all, it may only be a smattering derived from his
  education and his preceptor. Would you believe,” said the Emperor,
  “what I had to discuss with him? He maintained that inheritance is an
  abuse in monarchy, and I had to spend more than an hour, and employ
  all my eloquence and logic, in proving to him that this right
  constitutes the peace and happiness of the people. It may be, too,
  that he was mystifying; for he is cunning, false, and expert . . .
  . . . . . .; he will push his fortunes. If I die here, he will be my
  real heir in Europe. I alone was able to stop him with his deluge of
  Tartars. The crisis is great, and will have lasting effects upon the
  Continent of Europe, especially upon Constantinople: he was solicitous
  with me for the possession of it. I have had much coaxing on this
  subject; but I constantly turned a deaf ear to it. It was necessary
  that that empire, shattered as it appeared, should constantly remain a
  point of separation between us; it was the marsh that prevented my
  right from being turned. As to Greece, it is another matter!” And,
  after talking awhile upon that country, he renewed the subject:
  “Greece awaits a liberator! There will be a brilliant crown of glory!
  He will inscribe his name for ever with those of Homer, Plato, and
  Epaminondas!—I perhaps was not far from it, when, during my campaign
  in Italy, arrived on the shores of the Adriatic, I wrote to the
  Directory, that I had before my eyes the kingdom of Alexander!—Still
  later I entered into engagements with Ali Pacha; and when Corfu was
  taken from us, they must have found there ammunition and a complete
  equipment for an army of forty or fifty thousand men. I had caused
  maps to be made of Macedonia, Servia, Albania, &c. Greece, the
  Peloponnesus at least, must be the lot of that European power which
  shall possess Egypt. It should be ours.”

                              END OF VOL. I.

             ANDOVER: STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY B. BENSLEY.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               Footnotes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            Transcriber’s Note

  The final line of text refers to the printer, but is not entirely
  legible. It would seem to refer to Benjamin Bensley (d. 1870).

  Whoever he might have been, errors deemed most likely to be the
  printer’s have been corrected, and are noted here. The references are
  to the page and line in the original. The issues tabulated below
  should be noted, along with the resolutions.

  There were a number of instances in the text where quoted material was
  missing either an opening or closing quotation mark. The proper
  placement is not always obvious, but the most plausible choice has
  been made in each case.

  10.21    “I have made no calculation about it,[”] I     Moved.
           replied.[”]

  38.1     which it would be  necess[s]ary to employ      Removed.

  41.8     who had shewn me great attent[ent]ion          Removed.

  42.26    [“]let mine also be accomplished.              Removed.

  51.11    continued his way towards the                  Added.
           accom[m]odation-ladder

  52.4     on bo[ra/ar]d  the Bellerophon                 Transposed.

  58.4     as if totally una[c]quainted with the language Added.

  60.12    The quantity and arrang[e]ment of the matter   Added.

  61.1     the Gra[u/n]d Marshal and I always followed    Inverted.
           him

  62.31    had received  Napoleon[s]’s pacific letter     Removed.

  64.40    the class of jurisprudence in [i/t]he          Replaced.
           University of Pisa

  73.11    who was posses[s]ed of great bodily as well as Added.
           mental vigour

  75.40    Duchess de Vicenza.[’]                         Added.
                                                          Probable.

  80.32    an early introduction to Madame d[é/u]         Replaced.
           Columbier

  109.3    “_Vive notre petit Caporal!_[”]                Removed.

  125.27   said Napoleon. [“]You know but little of men,  Added.

  133.10   The Emperor explained these feeling[s]         Added.
           surprisingly well

  134.4    On his arr[r]ival in Egypt                     Removed.

  168.29   the King mu[a/s]t have found his study         Replaced.

  190.18   may at a future period be renewed.[”]          Added.

  191.35   to bend the knee to him at his levee.[”]       Added.
                                                          Probable.

  201.12   in ignorance of the character of               Transposed.
           Maria-Lou[si/is]a

  228.17   [“]The National Guard was ordered out          Added.
                                                          Probable.

  231.6    than to the favo[n/u]r which it was intended   Inverted.

  269.16   [“]The following are the principal points      Removed.

  281.13   over the whole of the grounds[,/.] The Emperor Replaced.

  284.39   [“]Each> system may, no doubt, be maintained   Added.
                                                          Probable.

  330.28   then[./,] struck with the smell of the paint,  Replaced.

  333.34   his style is out of our line.[’]”              Added.

  334.34   [“]Our history,” said the Emperor,             Added.
                                                          Probable
                                                          placement.

  336.7    had been much alarmed[.]                       Added.

  350.30   and we henceforth a[rg/gr]eed to pay the sums  Transposed.

  367.27   prepared to meet the enemy afte[r] seeing or   Restored.
           reading it

  385.15   to produce the best[s] effects                 Removed.

  386.1    dining every Sunday in the Galerie de Diane[’] Removed.

  386.39   [ve/ev]ery thing would have fallen into its    Transposed.
           natural course.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE, EXILE, AND CONVERSATIONS OF THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON. (VOL. I) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

------
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Memoirs of the life, exile, and conversations of the Emperor Napoleon. (Vol. II)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Memoirs of the life, exile, and conversations of the Emperor Napoleon. (Vol. II)

Author: comte de Emmanuel-Auguste-Dieudonné Las Cases


        
Release date: January 16, 2017 [eBook #53968]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53968

Credits: Produced by KD Weeks, Josep Cols Canals and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE, EXILE, AND CONVERSATIONS OF THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON. (VOL. II) ***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_. Abbreviations
using superscripted letters are indicated using ‘^’ as Mess^{rs}.

Footnotes have been moved to follow the paragraphs in which they are
referenced.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

This is the second of four volumes, which can be found at Project
Gutenberg here:

   Volume I        https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53967
   Volume II       https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53968
   Volume III      https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53969
   Volume IV       https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53970

[Illustration:

  JOSEPHINE.

  _Published for Henry Colburn, March 1836._
]




                                MEMOIRS
                                   OF
                            THE LIFE, EXILE,
                                  AND
                             CONVERSATIONS,
                                 OF THE
                           EMPEROR NAPOLEON.

                                   BY
                        THE COUNT DE LAS CASES.

                             A NEW EDITION.

                             WITH PORTRAITS
                   AND NUMEROUS OTHER EMBELLISHMENTS.

                                VOL. II.


                                LONDON:

                      PUBLISHED FOR HENRY COLBURN,
 BY RICHARD BENTLEY; BELL AND BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH; J. CUMMING, DUBLIN;
                          AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.

                                -------

                              MDCCCXXXVI.




                                ANDOVER:

                 STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY B. BENSLEY.




                                MEMOIRS

                                   OF

                         THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON.

                                -------

           THE TWO EMPRESSES.—THE PRINCESS PAULINE.—ELOQUENT
                        EFFUSION OF THE EMPEROR.

On another of these evenings, the Emperor was holding forth against the
caprice of women: “Nothing,” said he, “more clearly indicates rank,
education, and good breeding among them, than evenness of temper and the
constant desire to please.” He added that they were bound by
circumstances to appear at all times mistresses of themselves, and to be
always attending to their part on the stage. His two wives, he observed,
had always been so: they certainly differed greatly in their qualities
and dispositions; but they always agreed in this point. Never had he
witnessed ill-humour in either the one or the other: to please him had
been the constant object with both of them.

Some one ventured to observe, however, that Maria-Louisa had boasted
that, whenever she desired any thing, no matter how difficult, she had
only to weep. The Emperor laughed, and said, this was new to him. He
might have suspected it of Josephine, but he had no idea of it in
Maria-Louisa. And then, addressing himself to Mesdames Bertrand and
Montholon: “Thus it is with you all, ladies,” said he: “in some points
you all agree.”

He continued for a long time to talk about the two Empresses, and
repeated, as usual, that one was Innocence, and the other the Graces. He
passed from them to his sisters, and dwelt particularly on the charms of
the Princess Pauline. It was admitted that she was, without dispute, the
handsomest woman in Paris. The Emperor said that the artists were
unanimous in considering her a perfect Venus de Medicis. A little
pleasantry was hazarded on the influence which the Princess Pauline had
exercised, at the Island of Elba, over General Drouot, whose assiduous
attentions she attracted in spite of the difference of their ages and
the harshness of his countenance. The Princess, it was said, had drawn
from him the secret of the intended departure, eight days before it took
place. He had repeated the fault of Turenne; and upon this the Emperor
said, “Such are women, and such is their dangerous power!” Here Madame
Bertrand declared that the Grand Marshal, to a certainty, had not done
as much. “Madame,” retorted the Emperor with a smile, “he was only your
husband.” Some one having remarked that the Princess Pauline, when at
Nice, had set up a post-waggon on the road, by which dresses and
fashions arrived from Paris every day, the Emperor said: “If I had been
aware of it, that should not have lasted long, she should have been well
scolded. But thus it happens: while one is Emperor one knows nothing of
these matters.”

After this conversation the Emperor enquired what was the day of the
month: it was the 11th of March. “Well!” said he, “it is a year ago
to-day, it was a brilliant day; I was at Lyons, I reviewed some troops,
I had the Mayor to dine with me, who, by the way, has boasted since that
it was the worst dinner he ever made in his life.” The Emperor became
animated; he paced the chamber quickly. “I was again become a great
power,” he continued: and a sigh escaped him, which he immediately
checked with these words, in an accent and with a warmth which it is
difficult to describe: “I had founded the finest empire in the world,
and I was so necessary to it that, in spite of all the last reverses,
here, upon my rock, I seem still to remain the master of France. Look at
what is going on there, read the papers, you will find it so in every
line. Let me once more set my foot there, they will see what France is,
and what I can do!” And then what ideas, what projects, he developed for
the glory and happiness of the country! He spoke for a long time, with
so much interest, and so unreservedly, that we could have forgotten
time, place, and seasons. A part of what he said follows:

“What a fatality,” he said, "that my return from the Island of Elba was
not acquiesced in, that every one did not perceive that my reign was
desirable and necessary for the balance and repose of Europe! But kings
and people both feared me; they were wrong, and may pay dearly for it. I
returned a new man; they could not believe it; they could not imagine
that a man might have sufficient strength of mind to alter his
character, or to bend to the power of circumstances. I had, however,
given proofs of this, and some pledges to the same effect. Who is
ignorant that I am not a man for half-measures? I should have been as
sincerely the monarch of the constitution and of peace, as I had been of
absolute sway and great enterprises.

"Let us reason a little upon the fears of kings and people on my
account. What could the kings apprehend? Did they still dread my
ambition, my conquests, my universal monarchy? But my power and my
resources were no longer the same; and, besides, I had only defeated and
conquered in my own defence: this is a truth which time will more fully
develop every day. Europe never ceased to make war upon France, her
principles, and me; and we were compelled to destroy, to save ourselves
from destruction. The coalition always existed openly or secretly,
avowed or denied; it was permanent; it only rested with the Allies to
give us peace; for ourselves, we were worn out; the French dreaded
making new conquests. As to myself, is it supposed that I am insensible
to the charms of repose and security, when glory and honour do not
require it otherwise? With our two Chambers, they might have forbidden
me in future to pass the Rhine; and why should I have wished it? For my
universal monarchy? But I never gave any convincing proof of insanity;
and what is its chief characteristic, but a disproportion between our
object and the means of attaining it. If I have been on the point of
accomplishing this universal monarchy, it was without any original
design, and because I was led on to it step by step. The last efforts
wanting to arrive at it seemed so trifling, was it very unreasonable to
attempt them? But, on my return from Elba, could a similar idea, a
thought so mad, a purpose so unattainable, enter the head of the
silliest man in the world? The Sovereigns, then, had nothing to fear
from my arms.

"Did they apprehend that I might overwhelm them with anarchical
principles? But they knew by experience my opinions on that point. They
have all seen me occupy their territories: how often have I been urged
to revolutionize their states, give municipal functions to their cities,
and excite insurrection among their subjects! However I may have been
stigmatized, in their names, as _the modern Attila, Robespierre on
horseback_, &c. they all know better at the bottom of their hearts—let
them look there! Had I been so, I might perhaps still have reigned; but
they most certainly would have long since ceased to reign. In the great
cause of which I saw myself the chief and the arbiter, one of two
systems was to be followed: to make kings listen to reason from the
people; or to conduct the people to happiness by means of their kings.
But it is well known to be no easy matter to check the people when they
are once set on: it was more rational to reckon a little upon the wisdom
and intelligence of rulers. I had a right always to suppose them
possessed of sufficient intellect to see such obvious interests: I was
deceived; they never calculated at all, and in their blind fury, they
let loose against me that which I withheld when opposed to them. They
will see!!!

"Lastly, did the Sovereigns take umbrage at seeing a mere soldier attain
a crown? Did they fear the example? The solemnities, the circumstances,
that accompanied my elevation, my eagerness to conform to their habits,
to identify myself with their existence, to become allied to them by
blood and by policy, closed the door sufficiently against new comers.
Besides, if there must needs have been the spectacle of an interrupted
legitimacy, I maintain that it was much more to their interest that it
should take place in my person, one risen from the ranks, than in that
of a prince, one of their own family: for thousands of ages will elapse
before the circumstances accumulated in my case draw forth another from
among the crowd to reproduce the same spectacle; while there is not a
Sovereign who has not, at a few paces distance in his palace, cousins,
nephews, brothers, and relations, to whom it would be easy to follow
such an example if once set.

"On the other side, what was there to alarm the people? Did they fear
that I should come to plunder and to impose chains on them?—On the
contrary, I came the Messiah of peace and of their rights: this new
maxim was my whole strength—to violate it would have been ruin. But even
the French mistrusted me; they had the insanity to discuss, when there
was nothing to do but to fight; to divide, when they should have united
on any terms. And was it not better to run the risk of having me again
for master than to expose themselves to that of being subjected to a
foreign yoke? Would it not have been easier to rid themselves of a
single despot, of one tyrant, than to shake off the chains of all the
nations united? And moreover, whence arose this mistrust of me? Because
they had already seen me concentrate all efforts in myself, and direct
them with a vigorous hand? But do they not learn at the present day, to
their cost, how necessary that was? Well! the danger was in any case the
same: the contest terrible, and the crisis imminent. In this state of
things, was not absolute power necessary, indispensable? The welfare of
the country obliged me even to declare it openly on my return from
Leipsic. I should have done so again on my return from Elba. I was
wanting in consistency, or rather in confidence in the French, because
many of them no longer placed any in me, and it was doing me a great
wrong. If narrow and vulgar minds only saw, in all my efforts, a care
for my own power, ought not those of greater scope to have shewn that,
under the circumstances in which we were placed, my power and the
country were but one! Did it require such great and incurable mischiefs
to enable them to comprehend me? History will do me more justice: it
will signalize me as the man of self-denials and disinterestedness. To
what temptations was I not exposed in the army of Italy? England offered
me the Crown of France at the time of the treaty of Amiens.—I refused
peace at Châtillon: I disdained all personal stipulations at
Waterloo;—and why? Because all this had no reference to my country, and
I had no ambition distinct from her’s—that of her glory, her ascendancy,
her majesty. And there is the reason that, in spite of so many
calamities, I am still so popular among the French. It is a sort of
instinct of after-justice on their part.

"Who in the world ever had greater treasures at his disposal? I have had
many hundred millions in my vaults; many other hundreds composed my
_domaine de l’extraordinaire_: all these were my own. What is become of
them?—They were poured out in the distresses of the country. Let them
contemplate me here: I live destitute upon my rock. My fortune was
wholly in that of France. In the extraordinary situation to which fate
had raised me, my treasures were her’s: I had identified myself
completely with her destinies. What other calculation was consistent
with the height to which I had risen? Was I ever seen occupied about my
personal interests? I never knew any other enjoyment, any other riches,
than those of the public;—so much so, that when Josephine, who had a
taste for the Arts, succeeded under the sanction of my name in acquiring
some master-pieces, though they were in my palace, under my eyes, in my
family apartments, they offended me, I thought myself robbed: _they were
not in the Museum_.

“Ah! the French people undoubtedly did much for me! more than was ever
done before for man! But, at the same time, who ever did so much for
them? who ever identified himself with them in the same manner? But to
return.—After all, what could be their fears? Were not the Chambers and
the new Constitution sufficient guarantees for the future? Those
additional Acts, against which so much indignation was expressed, did
they not carry in themselves their own corrective—remedies that were
infallible? How could I have violated them? I had not myself millions of
arms; I was but one man. Public opinion raised me up once more; public
opinion might equally put me down again; and, compared with this risk,
what had I to gain?”

"But as to surrounding States (I speak particularly as regards England),
what could be her fears, her motives, her jealousies? We enquire in
vain. With our new Constitution, our two Chambers, had we not adopted
her creed for the future? Was not that the sure means of coming to a
mutual understanding, to establish in future a community of interest?
The caprice, the passions of their rulers, once fettered, the interests
of the people move on, without obstacle, in their natural course: look
at the merchants of hostile nations; they continue their intercourse,
and pursue their business however their governments may wage war. The
two nations had arrived at that point.—Thanks to their respective
parliaments, each would have become the guarantee for the other: and who
can ever tell to what extent the union of the two nations and of their
interests might have been carried; what new combinations might have been
set to work? It is certain that, on the establishment of our two
Chambers and our Constitution, the Ministers of England had in their
hands the glory and prosperity of their country, the destinies and the
welfare of the world. Had I beaten the English army and won my last
battle, I should have caused a great and happy astonishment; the
following day I would have proposed peace, and, for once, it would have
been I who scattered benefits with a prodigal hand. Instead of this,
perhaps, the English will one day have to lament that they were
victorious at Waterloo.

"I repeat it, the people and the sovereigns were wrong: I had restored
thrones and an inoffensive nobility; and thrones and nobility may again
find themselves in danger. I had fixed and consecrated the reasonable
limits of the people’s rights; vague, peremptory and undefined claims
may again arise.

“Had my return, my establishment on the throne, my adoption, been freely
acquiesced in by the sovereigns, the cause of kings and the people would
have been settled; both would have gained. Now they are again to try it;
both may lose. They might have concluded every thing; they may have
every thing to begin again: they might have secured a long and certain
calm, and already begun to enjoy it: and, instead of that, a spark may
now be sufficient to re-produce a general conflagration! Poor, weak
humanity!”

Attached, as I am, to the words and the opinions which I gathered from
Napoleon on his rock of exile, and however perfectly persuaded and
convinced of their entire sincerity, I do not the less experience an
extreme gratification, whenever a testimony from another quarter
confirms the truth of them; and I am bound to say that I have that
gratification as often as opportunity occurs of obtaining other
evidence.

The reader has just perused the foregoing remarkable passage, in which
Napoleon expresses his ideas, his intentions, his sentiments. What a
value do not these expressions collected at St. Helena acquire, when we
find them re-echoed in Europe, at the distance of 2000 leagues, by a
celebrated writer, who, with a shade of difference in his opinions, and
at a very different time, had himself received them from the same lips!
What a fortunate circumstance for history! I cannot, indeed, forbear
bringing forward here this extract from M. Benjamin Constant, as well on
account of the intrinsic merit of the expressions, as from the weight
they acquire from the distinguished writer who records them; and also
from the pleasure I feel in seeing them coincide so exactly with what I
have collected myself in another hemisphere. There are the same
intentions, the same depth of thought, the same sentiments.

“I went to the Tuileries,” says M. Benjamin Constant in his account; "I
found Bonaparte alone. He began the conversation: it was long: I will
only give an analysis of it; for I do not propose to make an exhibition
of an unfortunate man. I will not amuse my readers at the expense of
fallen greatness; I will not give up to malevolent curiosity him whom I
have served, whatever might be my motive; and I will not transcribe more
of his discourse than is indispensable: but in what I shall transcribe,
I will use his own words.

“He did not attempt to deceive me either as to his views, or the state
of affairs. He did not present himself as one corrected by the lessons
of adversity: he did not desire to take the merit of returning to
liberty from inclination; he investigated coolly, as regarded his
interest, and, with an impartiality too nearly allied to indifference,
what was possible and what was preferable.

“‘The nation,’ said he, ‘has rested for twelve years from all political
agitation, and for a year it has been undisturbed by war: this double
repose has begotten a necessity for motion. It desires, or fancies it
desires, a public rostrum and assemblies; it has not always desired
them. It cast itself at my feet when I came to the government; you must
remember, you who made trial of its opinion. Where was your support,
your power? No where. I took less authority than I was invited to take.
Now all is changed. A weak government, opposed to the interests of the
nation, has given these interests the habit of taking up the defensive,
and of cavilling at authority. The taste for constitutions, debates,
harangues, seems to return.... However, it is only the minority that
desires it, do not deceive yourself. The people, or if you like it
better, the mob, desire me alone; you have not seen them, this mob,
crowding after me, rushing from the tops of the mountains, calling me,
seeking me, saluting me.[1] On my return hither from Cannes, I did not
conquer—I administered.... I am not only, as it has been said, the
Emperor of the soldiers; I am the Emperor of the peasants, of the lower
ranks in France.... Thus, in spite of all that is past, you see the
people return to me—there is a sympathy between us. It is not so with
the privileged classes; the nobility have served me, have rushed in
crowds into my ante-chambers, there are no offices that they have not
accepted, solicited, pressed for. I have had my _Montmorencies_, my
_Noailles_, my _Rohans_, my _Beauveaus_, my _Mortemarts_. But there was
no analogy between us. The steed curvetted, he was well trained, but I
felt him quivering under me. With the people it is another thing; the
popular fibre responds to mine: I am come from the ranks of the people,
my voice has influence over them. Observe these conscripts, these sons
of peasants, I did not flatter them, I treated them with severity; they
did not the less surround me, they did not the less shout ‘_The Emperor
for ever!_’ It is because between them and me there is an identity of
nature; they look to me as their support, their defender against the
nobles.... I have but to make a sign, or rather to turn away my eyes,
and the nobles will be massacred in all the departments. They have
carried on such fine intrigues for these six months!... But I will not
be the King of a _Jacquerie_. If there are any means of governing with a
Constitution, well and good..... I wished for the empire of the world;
and, to insure it, unlimited power was necessary to me. To govern France
only, a Constitution may be better.... I wished for the empire of the
world, and who in my situation would not have wished for it? The world
invited me to govern it: sovereigns and subjects vied with each other in
hastening beneath my sceptre. I have rarely found any opposition in
France; but I have, however, met with more from some obscure unarmed
Frenchmen, than from all those kings, so vain at present of no longer
having a popular man for their equal.... Consider, then, what seems to
you to be possible. Give me your ideas. Free elections, public
discussions, responsible ministers, liberty, all this is my wish.... The
liberty of the press in particular: to stifle it is absurd—I am
satisfied upon this point.... I am the man of the people, if the people
sincerely wish for liberty: I owe it to them. I have recognised their
sovereignty; I am bound to lend an ear to their desires, even to their
caprices. I never desired to oppress them for my own gratification. I
had great designs, fate has decided them; I am no longer a conqueror, I
can no more become so. I know what is possible and what is not; I have
now but once charge—to relieve France, and to give her a government that
is suited to her.... I am not inimical to liberty: I set it aside when
it obstructed my road; but I comprehend it, I have been educated in its
principles.... At the same time, the work of fifteen years is destroyed;
it cannot begin again. It would require twenty years, and the sacrifice
of two millions of men.... Besides I am desirous of peace, and I shall
obtain it only by dint of victories. I will not hold out false hopes to
you; I cause reports to be circulated that negotiations are on foot; but
there are none. I foresee a difficult contest, a long war. To maintain
it, the nation must support me; but in return, it will require
liberty,—and it shall have it.... The situation is new. I desire no
better than to receive information; I grow old; a man is no longer at
forty-five what he was at thirty. The repose of a constitutional monarch
may be well suited to me. It will assuredly be still more suitable to my
son.’”

Footnote 1:

  _Note by M.B.C._—Bonaparte attached a high value to the proofs that
  his return was not effected by military manœuvres. I am sorry that I
  have not by me six pages which he had written or dictated on this
  subject, and which he had carefully corrected. He put them into my
  hands at the time of the communication referred to here. He desired
  that I would reply to Lord Castlereagh, who, in a speech in
  parliament, had attributed all his success to the army.

  Not choosing to write at all, till I had ascertained that it was not a
  despot that I was restoring to France, I declined this task; and, in
  1815, I entrusted the sketch which Napoleon had given me to one of my
  friends, who set out for England, and from whom I have hitherto
  neglected to get it back again. It was written with much warmth; it
  contained expressions singular, but powerful, a great rapidity of
  thought, and some strokes of real eloquence.

13th.—The Emperor sent instructions to the Grand Marshal to write to the
Admiral to enquire if a letter which he, Napoleon, should write to the
Prince Regent would be sent to him. Towards four o’clock, the Deputy
Governor Skelton and his lady desired to pay their respects to the
Emperor. He received them, took them to walk in the garden, and
afterwards out with him in his carriage. The weather had been extremely
foggy all day. Upon its clearing up for a short time we saw, on a
sudden, a corvette or frigate very near, and coming in with all sails
set.

        INSULT TO THE EMPEROR AND THE PRINCE OF WALES.—EXECUTION
                      OF NEY.—ESCAPE OF LAVALETTE.

14th—15th. We received the Admiral’s answer. After beginning, according
to his established form, by saying that he knew no person by the title
of ‘Emperor’ at St. Helena, he stated, that he would undoubtedly send
the Emperor’s letter to the Prince Regent: but that he should adhere to
the tenor of his instructions, which directed him not to allow any paper
to be despatched to England, without having first opened it.

This communication, it must be acknowledged, gave us great astonishment:
the part of the instructions cited by the Admiral had two objects in
view, both of them foreign to the interpretation put upon them by this
officer.

The first was, in the case of our making any complaints, that the local
authorities might add their observations, and that the government, in
England, might do us justice more speedily, without being obliged to
send again to the island for farther information. This precaution, then,
was entirely for our interest. The second object of this measure was
that our correspondence might not be prejudicial to the interests of the
government or the policy of England. But we were writing to the
Sovereign, to the chief, to the individual in whom these interests and
this government centered: and if there was any conspiracy here, it was
not on the part of us, who were writing to him, but rather on his who
intercepted our letter, or resolved to violate the privacy of it. That
they should place jailors about us with all their equipage, though we
did not consider it just, still it seemed possible. But that these
jailors should cause their functions to react, even upon their
Sovereign, was a thing for which we could not find a name! It was to
attach to him completely the idea of a King without faculties, or of a
Sultan buried in the recesses of his Seraglio! It was really a monstrous
phenomenon in our European manners!

For a long time, we had little or no intercourse with the Admiral. One
thought that ill humour had perhaps dictated his answer; another
supposed that he was fearful the letter might contain some complaints
against him. But the Admiral knew the Emperor too well, not to be aware
that he would never appeal to any other tribunal than to that of
nations. I, who knew what would have been the subject of the letter,
felt the most lively indignation at it! The sole intention of the
Emperor had been to employ this method, the only one that seemed
compatible with his dignity, to write to his wife, and obtain tidings of
his son. However, the Grand Marshal replied to the Admiral that he
either over-stepped, or misinterpreted his instructions; that his
determination could only be regarded as another instance of flagrant
vexation; that the condition imposed was too much beneath the dignity of
the Emperor, as well as of the Prince Regent, for him to retain any
intention of writing.

The frigate that had just arrived was the Spey, bringing the European
papers to the 31st December: they contained the execution of the
unfortunate Marshal Ney, and the escape of Lavalette.

“Ney,” said the Emperor, “as ill attacked as defended, had been
condemned by the Chamber of Peers, in the teeth of a formal
capitulation. His execution had been allowed to take place; that was
another error—from that moment he became a martyr. That Labedoyere
should not have been pardoned, because the clemency extended to him
would have seemed only a predilection in favour of the old Aristocracy,
might be conceived; but the pardon of Ney would only have been a proof
of the strength of the government, and the moderation of the Prince. It
will be said, perhaps, that an example was necessary! But the Marshal
would become so, much more certainly, by a pardon, after being degraded
by a sentence: it was, to him, in fact, a moral death that deprived him
of all influence; and nevertheless the object of authority would be
obtained, the Sovereign satisfied, the example complete. The refusal of
pardon to Lavalette, and his escape, were new grievances equally
unpopular,” said the Emperor.

“But the saloons of Paris,” he observed, “exhibited the same passions as
the clubs; the nobility were a new version of the Jacobins. Europe,
moreover, was in a state of complete anarchy; the code of political
immorality was openly followed; whatever fell into the hands of the
Sovereigns was turned to the advantage of each of them. At least in my
time I was the butt of all the accusations of this kind. The Sovereigns
then talked of nothing but principles and virtue; but now,” added he,
“that they are victorious and without control, they practise
unblushingly all the wrongs which they themselves then reprobated. What
resource and what hope were there then left for nations and for
morality? Our countrywomen at least,” he observed, “have rendered their
sentiments illustrious: Madame Labedoyere was on the point of dying from
grief, and these papers shew us that Madame Ney has displayed the most
courageous and determined devotion. Madame Lavalette is become the
heroine of Europe.”

                     MESSAGE FOR THE PRINCE REGENT.

16th.—The Emperor had quitted the Encyclopedia Britannica, to take his
lessons in English in the _Annual Register_. He read there the adventure
of a Mr. Spencer Smith, arrested at Venice, ordered to be sent to
Valenciennes, and who made his escape on the road. “This must be a very
simple affair,” said the Emperor, “which the narrator has converted into
a statement of importance.” The circumstance was totally unknown to him;
it was a police affair of too little consequence, he observed, to have
found its way up to him.

About four o’clock the captain of the Spey, just arrived from Europe,
and the captain of the Ceylon, about to sail for England, were presented
to the Emperor. He was in low spirits—he was unwell: the audience of the
first was very short; that of the second would have been the same, had
he not roused the Emperor by asking if we had any letters to send to
Europe. The Emperor then desired me to ask him if he should see the
Prince Regent; on his answering in the affirmative, I was charged to
inform him that the Emperor was desirous of writing to the Prince
Regent, but that in consequence of the observation of the Admiral, that
he would open the letter, he had abstained from it, as being
inconsistent with his dignity and with that of the Prince Regent
himself: that he had, indeed, heard the laws of England much boasted of,
but that he could not discover their benefits anywhere; that he had only
now to expect, indeed to desire, an executioner; that the torture they
made him endure was inhuman, savage; that it would have been more open
and energetic to put him to death. The Emperor made me request of the
captain that he would take upon him to deliver these words, and
dismissed him: he looked very red and was much embarrassed.

            SPIRIT OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE ISLE OF FRANCE.

17th.—An English Colonel, arrived from the Cape on his return from the
Isle of France, came in the morning and addressed himself to me, to try
to get an introduction to the Emperor. The Admiral had only allowed his
vessel to remain two or three hours in the road. Having prevailed on the
Emperor to receive him at four o’clock, he assured me that he would
rather miss his vessel than lose such an opportunity. The Emperor was
not very well, he had passed several hours in his bath; at four he
received the Colonel.

The Emperor put many questions to him concerning the Isle of France,
lately ceded to the English; it seems that its prosperity and its
commerce suffer from its change of sovereignty.

After the departure of the Colonel, being alone with the Emperor in the
garden, I told him that his person seemed to have remained very dear to
the inhabitants of the Isle of France; that the Colonel had informed me
that the name of Napoleon was never pronounced there but with
commiseration. It was precisely on the day of a great festival in the
colony, that they learned his departure from France and his arrival at
Plymouth; the theatre was to be particularly attractive: the news having
arrived during the day, in the evening there was not a single colonist,
either white or of colour, in the house: there were only some English,
who were exceedingly confused and irritated at the circumstance. The
Emperor listened to me. “It is quite plain,” said he, after some
moments’ silence; “this proves that the inhabitants of the Isle of
France have continued French. I am the country; they love it: it has
been wounded in my person, they are grieved at it.” I added that the
change of dominion restraining their expressions, they durst not propose
his health publicly; but that the Colonel said they never neglected it
notwithstanding; they drank to _him_, this word had become consecrated
to Napoleon. These details touched him. “Poor Frenchmen!” he said with
emphasis—"Poor People! Poor Nation! I deserved all that, I loved thee!
But thou, thou surely didst not deserve all the ills that press upon
thee! Ah! thou didst merit well that one should devote himself to thee!
But what infamy, what baseness, what degradation, it must be confessed,
I had about me!" And, addressing himself to me, he added: “I do not
speak here of your friends of the Fauxbourg-Saint-Germain; for with
respect to them it is another matter.”

There frequently reached us incidents and expressions which, like those
from the Isle of France, were calculated to excite emotion in the heart.
The Island of Ascension, in our neighbourhood, had always been desert
and abandoned; since we have been here, the English have thought proper
to form an establishment there. The captain who went to take possession
of it told us, on his return, that he was much astonished on landing to
find upon the beach, _May the great Napoleon live for ever!_

In the last papers that reached us, among many good-natured sallies, it
was remarked, in several languages, that _Paris_ would never be happy
till his _Helen_ should be restored to him: these were a few drops of
honey in our cup of wormwood.

                HIS INTENTIONS RESPECTING ROME.—HORRIBLE
                           FOOD.—BRITANNICUS.

18th—19th. The Emperor was on horseback by eight o’clock. He had
abstained from it for a long time: want of space to ride over was the
cause. His health suffers visibly in consequence, and it is astonishing
that the want of exercise is not still more hurtful to him, who was in
the daily habit of taking it to a violent degree. On our return, the
Emperor breakfasted out of doors; he detained us all. After breakfast,
the conversation fell on Herculaneum and Pompeii; the phenomenon and
epoch of their destruction, the time and the accident of their modern
discovery, the monuments and the curiosities, which they have since
afforded us. The Emperor said that if Rome had remained under his
dominion, she would have risen again from her ruins: he intended to have
cleared away all the rubbish; to have restored as much as possible. He
did not doubt that, the same spirit extending through all the vicinity,
it might have been in some degree the same with Herculaneum and Pompeii.

Breakfast being concluded, the Emperor sent my son to bring the volume
of Crevier which contains this event; and he read it to us, as well as
the death and character of Pliny. He retired about noon to take some
rest. Towards six o’clock we took our usual round in the carriage. The
Emperor took with him Mr. and Mrs. Skelton, who were come to visit him.

On our return, the Emperor, driven from the garden by the damp, went to
see General Gourgaud, who was recovering rapidly. After dinner, on
leaving the table and returning to the drawing-room, we could not help
reverting to the meal we had just made;—literally nothing was fit to
eat: the bread bad, the wine not drinkable, the meat disgusting and
unwholesome: we are frequently obliged to send it back again. They
continue in spite of our remonstrances, to send it to us dead, because
by that method they can put us off with such animals as have died
naturally.

The Emperor, shocked at this representation, could not refrain from
saying, with warmth: “No doubt there are people whose physical situation
is still worse; but that circumstance does not deprive us of the right
of giving an opinion on our own condition, or on the infamous manner in
which we are treated. The injustice of the English government, not
content with sending us hither, has extended to the selection of the
individuals to whom our persons and the supply of our wants are
intrusted! For my part, I should suffer less if I were sure that it
would one day be divulged to the whole world in such a way as to brand
with infamy those who are guilty of it. But let us talk of something
else,” said he—“what is the day of the month?” He was told it was the
19th of March: “What!” he exclaimed, “the eve of the 20th of March!” And
a few seconds afterwards: “But let us talk of something else.” He sent
for a volume of Racine, and at first began to read the comedy of the
_Plaideurs_: but, after a scene or two, he turned to _Britannicus_,
which he read to us. When the reading was concluded, and the due tribute
of admiration had been paid, he said that Racine was censured for making
the _dénouement_ of this piece too sudden, that the poisoning of
Britannicus was not expected so early in the play as it ought to have
been. He highly praised the truth of the character of Narcissus,
observing that it was always by wounding the self-love of princes that
their determinations were most influenced.

20TH OF MARCH.—THE ACCOUCHEMENT OF THE EMPRESS.

20th.—After dinner one of us observed to the Emperor that he had been
less solitary, less quiet, that day twelve-month at the same hour. “I
was sitting down to table at the Tuileries,” said the Emperor. “I had
found it difficult to get thither: the dangers I went through in that
attempt were at least equal to those of a battle.” In fact he had been
seized, on his arrival, by thousands of officers and citizens; one party
had snatched him from another; he had been carried to the palace, and,
amidst a tumult like that of a mob about to tear a man to pieces,
instead of the orderly and respectful attendance of a multitude intent
on shewing their veneration for an individual. But we ought to look at
the sentiment and intention in this case: it was enthusiasm, and love,
carried to a pitch that resembled rage or madness.

The Emperor added that in all probability more than one person in Europe
would talk of him that evening; and that, in spite of all observation,
many a bottle would be emptied on his account.

The conversation then turned on the King of Rome; that day was the
anniversary of his birth; the Emperor reckoned that he must be five
years old. He then spoke of the accouchement of the Empress, and seemed
to take some pleasure in boasting that he had proved himself, on that
occasion, as good a husband as any in the world. He assisted the Empress
to walk about all night. We who were of the household knew something of
the matter; we had all been called together at the palace at ten in the
evening; we passed the night there; and the cries of the Empress
sometimes reached our ears. Towards morning the accoucheur having told
the Emperor that the pains had ceased, and that the labour might yet be
tedious, the Emperor went to the bath, and sent us away, desiring us,
however, not to go from home. The Emperor had not been long in the bath,
when the pains came on again; and the accoucheur ran to him, almost out
of his wits, saying he was the most unfortunate of men; that out of a
thousand labours in Paris there was not one more difficult. The Emperor,
dressing himself again as fast as he could, encouraged him, saying that
a man who understood his business ought never to lose his presence of
mind; that there was nothing in this case that he ought to be uneasy
about; that he had only to fancy he was delivering a citizen’s wife of
the Rue Saint-Denis: that nature had but one law; that he was sure he
would act for the best; and, above all, that he need not fear any
reproach. It was then represented to the Emperor that there was great
danger either for the mother or the child. “If the mother lives,” said
he, without hesitation, "I shall have another child. Act in this case as
if you were attending the birth of a cobbler’s son."

When he reached the Empress she really was in danger; the child
presented itself in an unfavourable posture, and there was every reason
to fear that it would be stifled.[2]

Footnote 2:

  This event took place in the presence of twenty-two persons:—The
  Emperor.—Dubois, Corvisart, Bourdier and Ivan.—Madames de Montebello,
  de Lucay, and de Montesquiou. The six first ladies:—Ballant,
  Deschamps, Durant, Hureau, Nabusson, and Gerard. Five ladies of the
  bed-chamber.—Mademoiselles Honoré, Edouard, Barbier, Aubert, and
  Geoffroy. The Keeper;—Madame Blaise, and two maids of the wardrobe.

The Emperor asked Dubois why he did not deliver her. He excused himself,
being unwilling to do it, he said, except in the presence of Corvisart,
who had not yet arrived. “But what can he tell you?” said the Emperor.
“If it is a witness, or a justification, you want to secure, here am I.”
Then Dubois, taking off his coat, commenced the operation. When the
Empress saw the instruments, she cried out in a piteous manner,
exclaiming that they were going to kill her. She was firmly held by the
Emperor, Madame de Montesquiou, Corvisart, who had just come in, &c.
Madame de Montesquiou dexterously took an opportunity to encourage her,
by declaring that she herself had more than once been in the same
situation.

The Empress, however, still persuaded herself that she was treated
differently from other women, and often repeated, “Am I to be sacrificed
because I am an Empress?” She declared, afterwards, to the Emperor, that
she really had entertained this fear. At length she was delivered. The
danger had been so imminent, said the Emperor, that all the etiquette
which had been studied and ordered was disregarded, and the child put on
one side, on the floor, whilst every one was occupied about the mother
only. The infant remained some moments in this situation, and it was
thought he was dead: it was Corvisart who took him up, chafed him, and
brought him to utter a cry.[3]

Footnote 3:

  In an interesting work published some years since relative to the
  return from Elba, there is this passage: “When young Napoleon came
  into the world, he was supposed to be dead; he had neither warmth,
  motion, nor respiration. Repeated efforts were made to produce signs
  of life, when the hundred guns destined to proclaim his birth were
  successively fired. The commotion and shock which they occasioned
  acted so powerfully on the organs of the royal infant as to bring him
  to his senses.”

CATILINE’S CONSPIRACY.—THE GRACCHI.—HISTORIANS.—SLEEP DURING A
  BATTLE.—CÆSAR AND HIS COMMENTARIES OF DIFFERENT MILITARY SYSTEMS.

21st—22nd. The Emperor rode out very early: we made the tour of our
limits in several directions. It is during these rides that the Emperor
now takes his lessons in English. I walk by his side; he speaks a few
sentences in English, which I translate, word by word, as he pronounces
them; by which method he perceives when he is understood, or is enabled
to correct his mistakes. When he has finished a sentence, I repeat it to
him in English, so that he may understand it well himself: this helps to
form his ear.

The Emperor was reading to-day, in the Roman History, of Catiline’s
conspiracy; he could not comprehend it in the way in which it is
described. “However great a villain Catiline might be,” observed he, “he
must have had some object in view: it could not be that of governing in
Rome, since he is accused of having intended to set fire to the four
quarters of the city.” The Emperor conceived it to be much more probable
that it was some new faction similar to those of Marius and Sylla, which
having failed, all the accusations calculated to excite the horror of
patriots, were, as usual in such cases, heaped on the head of its
leader. It was then observed to the Emperor that the same thing would
infallibly have happened to himself, had he been overpowered in
Vendemiaire, Fructidor, or Brumaire, before he had illumined with such
radiant brilliancy an horizon cleared of clouds.

The Gracchi gave rise to doubts and suspicions of a very different sort
in his mind, which, he said, became almost certainties to those who had
been engaged in the politics of our times. “History,” said he, "presents
these Gracchi, in the aggregate, as seditious people, revolutionists,
criminals; and, nevertheless, allows it to appear, in detail, that they
had virtues; that they were gentle, disinterested, moral men; and,
besides, they were the sons of the illustrious Cornelia, which, to great
minds, ought to be a strong primary presumption in their favour. How
then can such a contrast be accounted for? It is thus: the Gracchi
generously devoted themselves in behalf of the rights of the oppressed
people, against a tyrannical senate; and their great talents and noble
character endangered a ferocious aristocracy, which triumphed, murdered,
and calumniated them. The historians of a party have transmitted their
characters in the same spirit. Under the Emperors it was necessary to
continue in the same manner; the bare mention of the rights of the
people, under a despotic master, was a blasphemy, a downright crime.
Afterwards, the case was the same under the feudal system, which was so
fruitful in petty despots. Such, no doubt, is the fatality which has
attended the memory of the Gracchi. Throughout succeeding ages their
virtues have never ceased to be considered crimes; but at this day,
when, possessed of better information, we have thought it expedient to
reason, the Gracchi may and ought to find favour in our eyes.

“In that terrible struggle between the aristocracy and democracy, which
has been renewed in our times—in that exasperation of ancient landed
property against modern industry, which still ferments throughout
Europe, there is no doubt that if the aristocracy should triumph by
force, it would point out many Gracchi in all directions, and treat them
as mercifully as its predecessors did the Gracchi of Rome.”

The Emperor added that it was, moreover, easy to see that there was a
hiatus in the ancient authors at this period of history; that all which
the moderns now presented to us on this subject was mere gleaning. He
then reverted to the charges already made against honest Rollin and his
pupil Crevier: they were both devoid of talent, system, or colouring. It
was to be allowed that the ancients were far superior to us in this
point; and that because, amongst them, statesmen were literary men, and
men of letters statesmen; they combined professions, whilst we divide
them in an absolute manner. This famous division of labour, which in our
times produces such a perfection in mechanical arts, is quite fatal to
excellence in mental productions: every work of genius is superior in
proportion to the universality of the mind whence it emanates. We owe to
the Emperor the attempt to establish this principle by frequently
employing on various objects men wholly unconnected with each other;—it
was his system. He once appointed, of his own accord, one of his
chamberlains to go into Illyria to liquidate the Austrian debt: this was
a matter of importance, and extremely complicated. The chamberlain, who
had previously been a total stranger to public business, was alarmed;
and the minister, who had been deprived of this appointment, being
dissatisfied with it, ventured to represent to the Emperor that, his
nomination having fallen on a man entirely new to such matters, it might
be feared that he would not acquit himself satisfactorily. “I have a
lucky hand, sir,” was his answer: “those on whom I lay it are fit for
every thing.”

The Emperor, proceeding in his criticism, also censured severely what he
called historical fooleries, ridiculously exalted by translators and
commentators. “Such things prove, in the first place,” said he, “that
the historians formed erroneous judgments of men and circumstances. They
are wrong, for instance,” said Napoleon, “when they applaud so highly
the _continence of Scipio_, and fall into ecstasies at the calmness of
Alexander, Cæsar, and others, for having been able to sleep on the eve
of a battle. It could only be a monk, debarred from women, whose face
brightens up at the very name—who neighs behind his bars at their
approach, who could give Scipio much credit for forbearing to violate
the female whom chance threw into his power, while he had so many others
entirely at his disposal. A famished man might as well praise the hero
for having quietly passed by a table covered with victuals, without
greedily snatching at them.” As to sleeping just before a battle, there
was not, he assured us, one of our soldiers or generals who had not
twenty times performed that miracle; their heroism was chiefly produced
by the fatigue of the day before.

Here the Grand Marshal added that he could safely say he had seen
Napoleon sleep, not only on the eve of an engagement, but even during
the battle. “I was obliged to do so,” said Napoleon, “when I fought
battles that lasted three days; Nature was also to have her due: I took
advantage of the smallest intervals, and slept where and when I could.”
He slept on the field of battle at Wagram, and at Bautzen, even during
the action, and completely within the range of the enemy’s balls. On
this subject, he said that, independently of the necessity of obeying
nature, these slumbers afforded a general, commanding a very large army,
the important advantage of enabling him to await, calmly, the reports
and combinations of all his divisions, instead of, perhaps, being
hurried away by the only event which he himself could witness.

The Emperor farther said that he found in Rollin, and even Cæsar,
circumstances of the Gallic war which he could not understand. He could
not by any means comprehend the invasion of the Helvetii; the road they
took; the object ascribed to them; the time they spent in crossing the
Saone; the diligence of Cæsar, who found time to go into Italy, as far
as Aquileia, in quest of reinforcements, and who overtook the invaders
before they had passed the Saone, &c.; that it was equally difficult to
comprehend what was meant by establishing winter-quarters that extended
from Treves to Vannes. And as we expressed our surprise at the immense
works which the generals got performed by their soldiers, the ditches,
walls, great towers, galleries, &c., the Emperor observed that in those
times all efforts were directed to construction on the spot, whereas in
ours they were employed in conveyance. He also thought the ancient
soldiers laboured, in fact, more than ours. He had thoughts of dictating
something on that subject. “Ancient history, however,” said he,
“embraces a long period, and the system of war often changed. In our
days it was no longer that of the times of Turenne and Vauban:
field-works were growing useless; even the system of our fortresses had
become problematical or inefficient; the enormous quantity of bombs and
howitzers changed every thing. It was no longer against the horizontal
attack that defence was requisite, but also against the curve and the
reflected lines. None of the ancient fortresses were henceforth safe;
they ceased to be tenable; no country was rich enough to maintain them.
The revenue of France would be insufficient for her lines in Flanders,
for the exterior fortifications were now not above a fourth or fifth of
the necessary expense. Casements, magazines, places of shelter secure
from the effects of bombs, were now indispensably requisite, and these
were too expensive.” The Emperor complained particularly of the weakness
of modern masonry: the engineer department is radically defective in
this point; it had cost him immense sums, wholly thrown away.

Struck with these novel truths, the Emperor had invented a system
altogether at variance with the axioms hitherto established; it was to
have metal of an extraordinary calibre, to advance beyond the principal
line towards the enemy; and to have that principal line itself, on the
contrary, defended by a great quantity of small moveable artillery:
hence the enemy would be stopped short in his sudden advance; he would
have only weak pieces to attack powerful ones with; he would be
commanded by this superior calibre, round which the resources of the
fortress, the small pieces, would form in groups, or even advance to a
distance, as skirmishers, and might follow all the movements of the
enemy by means of their lightness and mobility. The enemy would then
stand in need of battering-cannon; he would be obliged to open trenches:
time would be gained, and the true object of fortification accomplished.
The Emperor employed this method with great success, and to the great
astonishment of the engineers, in the defence of Vienna, and in that of
Dresden; he intended to use it in that of Paris, which city could not,
he thought, be defended by any other means; but of the success of this
method he had no doubt.

DAYS AT LONGWOOD.—TRIAL OF DROUOT.—MILITARY
  CHARACTERS.—SOULT.—MASSENA.—THE EMPEROR’S COMRADES IN THE
  ARTILLERY—HIS NAME THOUGHT BY HIM TO BE UNKNOWN TO SOME PEOPLE, EVEN
  IN PARIS.

23rd—26th. The weather was very unfavourable during the greater part of
these mornings, on account of the heavy rains, which scarcely allowed us
to stir out of doors. The Emperor read a work by a Miss Williams, on the
return from the Isle of Elba; it had just reached us from England. He
was much disgusted with it, and with good reason: this production is
quite calumnious and false; it is the echo and collection of all the
reports invented at the time in certain malevolent Parisian societies.

As to our evenings, the weather was almost indifferent to us; whether it
rained, or the moon shone brightly, we literally made ourselves
prisoners. Towards nine o’clock we were surrounded by sentinels; to meet
them would have been painful. It is true that both the Emperor and
ourselves might have gone out at a later hour, accompanied by an
officer; but this would have been rather a punishment than a pleasure to
us, although the officer never could conceive this feeling. He gave us
reason to conclude, at first, that he imagined this seclusion to be
merely the effect of ill-humour, and thought it would not last long. I
know not what he may subsequently have thought of our perseverance.

The Emperor, as I believe I have already mentioned, sat down to table
pretty regularly at eight o’clock; he never remained there above half an
hour; sometimes scarcely a quarter of an hour. When he returned to the
drawing-room, if he happened to be unwell or taciturn, we had the
greatest difficulty in the world to get on till half-past nine or ten
o’clock; indeed, we could not effect it without the assistance of
reading. But when he was cheerful, and entered into conversation with
spirit, we were presently surprised to find it eleven o’clock, and
later: these were our pleasant evenings. He would then retire, with a
kind of satisfaction, at having, as he expressed it, conquered time. And
it was precisely on those days, when the remark applied with least
force, that he used to observe that it must require our utmost courage
to endure such a life.

On one of these evenings, the conversation turned upon the military
trials, which are now taking place in France. The Emperor thought that
General Drouot could not be condemned for coming in the suite of one
acknowledged sovereign to make war upon another. On this it was remarked
that what was now mentioned as his justification would be his greatest
danger at the tribunal of legitimacy.

The Emperor acknowledged, in fact, that there was nothing to be said to
the doctrines brought forward at this day: but, on the other hand, that,
in condemning General Drouot, they would condemn emigration, and
legitimize the condemnation of the emigrants. Whomsoever was found in
arms against France, the Republican doctrines punished with death; it
was not so with the Royal doctrine. If they should in this instance
adopt the Republican doctrine, the emigrant and royal party would
condemn themselves.

The case of Drouot, however, in a general point of view, was very
different even from that of Ney; and besides, Ney had evinced an
unfortunate vacillation of which Drouot had never been guilty. Thus the
interest which Ney had excited was wholly founded on opinion; whilst
that which was felt for Drouot was personal.

The Emperor dilated on the dangers and difficulties which the tribunals
and ministers of justice must experience, throughout the affairs
connected with his return from the Isle of Elba. Above all, he was
extremely struck by a particular circumstance relating to Soult, who, we
were told, was to be brought to trial. He (Napoleon) knew, he said, how
innocent Soult was; and yet, were it not for that circumstance, and were
he an individual and juror in Soult’s case, he had no doubt he should
declare him guilty, so strongly were appearances combined against him.
Ney, in the course of his defence, through some sentiment which it is
difficult to account for, stated, contrary to the truth, that the
Emperor had said Soult was in intelligence with him. Now, every
circumstance of Soult’s conduct during his administration, the
confidence which the Emperor placed in him after his return, &c., agreed
with that deposition: who, then, would not have condemned him? “Yet
Soult is innocent,” said the Emperor, “he even acknowledged to me that
he had taken a real liking to the King. The authority he enjoyed under
him,” he said, “so different from that of my ministers, was a very
agreeable thing, and had quite gained him over.”

Massena (whose proscription was also announced to us by the papers) was,
the Emperor said, another person whom they would perhaps condemn as
guilty of treason. All Marseilles was against him; appearances were
overwhelming; and yet he had fulfilled his duty up to the very moment of
declaring himself openly. On his return to Paris, he had even been far
from claiming any credit with the Emperor, when the latter asked him
whether he might have reckoned upon him. “The truth is,” continued the
Emperor, "that all the commanders did their duty; but they could not
withstand the torrent of opinion, and no one had sufficiently calculated
the sentiments of the mass of the people and the national impetuosity.
Carnot, Fouché, Maret, and Cambaceres, confessed to me, at Paris, that
they had been greatly deceived on this point. And no one understands it
well; even now.

“Had the King remained longer in France,” continued he, “he would
probably have lost his life in some insurrection; but, had he fallen
into my hands, I should have thought myself strong enough to have
allowed him every enjoyment in some retreat of his own selection; as
Ferdinand was treated at Valency.”

Immediately before this conversation, the Emperor was playing at chess,
and his king having fallen, he cried out—"Ah! my poor king, you are
down!" Some one having picked it up, and restored it to him in a
mutilated state—"Horrid!" he exclaimed; “I certainly do not accept the
omen, and I am far from wishing any such thing: my enmity does not
extend so far.”

I would not, on any account, have omitted this circumstance, trifling as
it may appear, because it is in many respects characteristic. We
ourselves, when the Emperor had retired, reverted to the incident. What
cheerfulness, what freedom of mind in such dreadful circumstances! we
said. What serenity in the heart! what absence of malice, irritation, or
hatred! Who could discover in him the man whom enmity and falsehood have
depicted as such a monster! Even amongst his own followers, who is there
that has well understood him, or taken sufficient pains to make him
known?

On another evening, the Emperor was speaking of his early years, when he
was in the artillery, and of his companions at the mess: he always
delighted in reverting to those days. One of his messmates was
mentioned, who, having been Prefect of the same department under
Napoleon and under the King, had not been able to retain his place on
the return of Napoleon. The Emperor, when he recollected him, said that
this person had, at a certain period, missed the opportunity of making
his fortune through him. When Napoleon obtained the command of the army
of the Interior, he loaded this person with favours, made him his
aide-de-camp, and intended to place great confidence in him; but this
favoured aide-de-camp had behaved very ill to him at the time of his
departure for the Army of Italy: he then abandoned his General for the
Directory. “Nevertheless,” said the Emperor, "when once I was seated on
the throne, he might have done much with me, if he had known how to set
about it. He had the claim of early friendship, which never loses its
influence; I should certainly never have withstood an unexpected
overture in a hunting-party, for instance, or half an hour’s
conversation on old times at any other opportunity. I should have
forgotten his conduct: it was no longer important whether he had been on
my side or not: I had united all parties. Those who had an insight into
my character were well aware of this: they knew that, with me, however I
might have felt disposed towards them, it was like the game of
prison-bars; when once the point was touched, the game was won. In fact,
if I wished to withstand them, I had no resource but that of refusing to
see them."

He mentioned another old comrade, who, with intelligence and the
requisite qualifications, might have done any thing with him. He also
said that a third would never have been removed from him, had he been
less rapacious.

We disputed amongst ourselves whether these people ever suspected the
secret, or their own chances; and whether the elevated station and the
Imperial splendour of Napoleon, had fairly allowed them to avail
themselves of his favourable disposition towards them.

With respect to the splendour of the Imperial power, the Grand Marshal
said that, however great and magnificent the Emperor had appeared to him
on the throne, he had never made on him a superior, perhaps an equal,
impression, to that which his situation at the head of the Army of Italy
had stamped on his memory. He explained and justified this idea very
successfully, and the Emperor heard him with some complacency.—But, we
observed, what great events took place afterwards! what elevation! what
grandeur! what renown throughout the world! The Emperor had listened.
“For all that,” said he, “Paris is so extensive, and contains so many
people of all sorts, and some so eccentric, that I can conceive there
may be some who never saw me, and others who never even heard my name
mentioned. Do not you think so?” And it was curious to see with what
whimsical ingenuity he himself maintained this assertion, which he knew
to be untenable. We all insisted loudly that, as to his name, there was
not a town or village in Europe, perhaps even in the world, where it had
not been pronounced. One person in company added—"Sire, before I
returned to France at the treaty of Amiens, your Majesty being then only
FIRST Consul, I determined to make a tour in Wales, as one of the most
extraordinary parts of Great Britain. I climbed the wildest mountains,
some of which are of prodigious height; I visited cabins that seemed to
me to belong to another world. As I entered one of these secluded
dwellings, I observed, to my fellow-traveller, that, in this spot, one
would expect to find repose, and escape the din of revolution. The
cottager, suspecting us to be French, on account of our accent,
immediately enquired the news from France, and what _Bonaparte_, the
First Consul, was about."

“Sire,” said another, "we had the curiosity to ask the Chinese officers
whether our European affairs had been heard of in their Empire.
‘Certainly,’ they replied; ‘in a confused manner, to be sure, because we
are totally uninterested in those matters; but the name of your Emperor
is famous there, and connected with grand ideas of conquest and
revolution:’ exactly as the names of those who have changed the face of
that part of the world have arrived in ours, such as Gengis Khan,
Tamerlane," &c.

[Illustration:

  MARSHAL BERTRAND.

  _Published for Henry Colburn, March, 1836._
]

POLITICAL EXAMINATION OF CONSCIENCE.—FAITHFUL STATEMENT OF THE CONDITION
  AND PROSPERITY OF THE EMPIRE.—LIBERAL IDEAS OF THE EMPEROR ON THE
  INDIFFERENCE OF PARTIES.—MARMONT.—MURAT.—BERTHIER.

27th.—This day the Emperor was walking in the garden with the Grand
Marshal and me. The conversation led us to make our political
self-examination.

The Emperor said that he had been very warm and sincere at the
commencement of the Revolution; that he had cooled by degrees, in
proportion as he acquired more just and solid ideas. His patriotism had
sunk under the political absurdities and monstrous domestic excesses of
our legislatures. Finally, his republican faith had vanished on the
violation of the choice of the people, by the Directory, at the time of
the battle of Aboukir.

The Grand Marshal said that, for his part, he had never been a
republican; but a very warm constitutionalist until the 10th of August,
the horrors of which day had cured him of all illusion. He had very
nearly been massacred in defending the King at the Tuileries.

As for me, it was notorious that I had begun my career as a pure and
most ardent royalist. “Why, then, it seems, gentlemen,” humorously
observed the Emperor, “that I am the only one amongst us who has been a
republican.”—"And something more, Sire," Bertrand and I both
replied.—"Yes," repeated the Emperor, “republican and patriot.”—"And I
have been a patriot, Sire," replied one of us, “notwithstanding my
royalism; but, what is still more extraordinary, I did not become so
till the period of the Imperial reign.”—"How! rogue!—are you compelled
to own that you did not always love your country?"—"Sire, we are making
our political self-examination, are we not? I confess my sins. When I
returned to Paris, by virtue of your amnesty, could I at first look upon
myself as a Frenchman, when every law, every decree, every ordinance
that covered the walls, constantly added the most opprobrious epithets
to my unlucky denomination of Emigrant. Nor did I think of remaining,
when I first arrived. I had been attracted by curiosity, yielding to the
invincible influence of one’s native land, and the desire of breathing
the air of one’s country. I now possessed nothing there: in order to be
allowed only to see France once more, I had been compelled, at the
frontier, to swear to the relinquishment of my patrimony, to accede to
the laws which decreed its loss; and I looked on myself as a mere
traveller in that country once mine. I was a true foreigner,
discontented and even malevolent. The empire came; it was a great event.
Now," said I, “my manners, prejudices, and principles triumph; the only
difference is in the person of the sovereign. When the campaign of
Austerlitz opened, my heart, with surprise, found itself once more
French. My situation was painful; I felt as if torn limb from limb; I
was divided between blind passion and national sentiment: the triumphs
of the French army and their general displeased me; yet their defeat
would have humbled me. At length, the prodigies of Ulm, and the
splendour of Austerlitz, put an end to my embarrassment. I was
vanquished by glory.—I admired, I acknowledged, I loved Napoleon; and
from that moment I became French to enthusiasm. Henceforth I have had no
other thoughts, spoken no other language, felt no other sentiments; and
here I am by your side.”

The Emperor then asked innumerable questions relative to the Emigrants,
their numbers, and disposition. I related many curious facts respecting
our princes, the Duke of Brunswick, and the King of Prussia. I made him
laugh at the extravagance of our presumption, our unbounded confidence
of success, the disorder of our affairs, the incapacity of our leaders.
“Men,” said I, “really were not at that time what they have since been.
Fortunately, those with whom we had to contend were, at first, only our
equals in strength. Above all, we thought, and repeated to one another,
that an immense majority of the French nation was on our side; and, for
my part, I firmly believed it. I soon had, however, an opportunity of
being undeceived; when our parties having arrived at Verdun, and beyond
it, not a single person came to join us; on the contrary, every one fled
at our approach. Nevertheless I still believed it, even after my return
from England; so greatly did we deceive ourselves afterwards with the
absurdities that we related to each other. We said that the government
was vested in a handful of people; that it was maintained by force
alone; that it was detested by the nation; and there must be some who
have never ceased to think so. I am persuaded that, amongst those who
now talk in that manner in the Legislative Body, there are some who
speak as they think; so perfectly do I recognise the spirit, the ideas,
and the expressions of Coblentz.”—“But at what period were you
undeceived?” said the Emperor.—“Very late, Sire. Even when I rallied,
and came to your Court, I was led much more by admiration and sentiment,
than by conviction of your strength and stability. However, when I came
into your Council of State, seeing the freedom with which the most
decisive decrees were voted, without a single thought of the slightest
resistance; seeing around me nothing but conviction and entire
persuasion, it then appeared to me that your power, and the state of
affairs, gained strength with a rapidity that I could not account for.
By pondering on the cause of this change, I at length made a great and
important discovery; namely, that matters had long stood thus, but that
I had neither known, nor been willing to perceive, it; I had hid my head
under the bushel, lest the light should reach my eyes. Now that I found
myself forced into the midst of its brightness, I was dazzled by it.
From that moment, all my prejudices fell to the ground; the film was
taken from my eyes.

“Being afterwards sent by your Majesty on a mission, and having
traversed more than sixty departments, I employed the most scrupulous
attention and the most perfect sincerity in ascertaining the truth of
which I had so long doubted. I interrogated the prefects, the inferior
authorities; I caused documents and registers to be produced to me; I
questioned private individuals without being known to them; I employed
all possible means of trying the truth of my conclusions, and I remained
fully convinced that the government was completely national, and founded
in the will of the people; that France had, at no period of her history,
been more powerful, more flourishing, better governed, or more happy;
the roads had never been better maintained; agriculture had increased by
a tenth, a ninth, perhaps an eighth in its productions.[4] A
restlessness, a general ardour animated all minds to exertion, and
inspired them to aim at a daily personal improvement. Indigo was gained;
sugar would inevitably be so. Never, at any period, had internal
commerce and industry of every species, been carried to such a pitch;
instead of four millions of livres in cotton, which were used at the
Revolution, more than thirty millions were now manufactured, although we
could obtain none by sea, and received it over-land from the distance of
Constantinople. Rouen was become quite a prodigy in production. The
taxes were everywhere paid; the Conscription was nationalized; France,
instead of being exhausted, contained a more numerous population than
before, and was daily increasing.

Footnote 4:

  It is a singular fact that the person from whom I had this information
  on agriculture, in Languedoc, was the identical M. de Villèle, who has
  since become celebrated.

“When I again appeared amongst my former acquaintance with these data,
there was an absolute insurrection against me. They laughed in my face,
and almost hooted me. Yet there were some sensible people amongst them,
and I now possessed strong grounds of argument; I staggered many, and
convinced a few; thus I too have had my victories.”

The Emperor said it must be agreed that our being assembled at St.
Helena from political causes was certainly a most extraordinary
circumstance: that we had come to a common centre by roads originally
leading in very different directions. However, we had travelled through
them with sincerity. Nothing more clearly proved the sort of chance, the
uncertainty, and the fatality which usually, in the labyrinth of
revolutions, direct upright and honest hearts.

Nor can any thing more clearly prove, continued he, how necessary
indulgence and intelligent views are to recompose society after long
disorders. It was these dispositions and these principles which had made
him, he said, the most fit man for the circumstances of the month of
_Brumaire_; and it was those which still rendered him without doubt the
fittest in the actual state of France. On this point he had neither
mistrust, nor prejudice, nor passion; he had constantly employed men of
all classes, of all parties, without ever looking back, without
enquiring what they had done, what they had said, what they had thought;
only requiring, he said, that they should pursue in future and with
sincerity the common object—the welfare and the glory of all—that they
should shew themselves true and good Frenchmen. Above all, he had never
made overtures to leaders in order to gain over parties; but, on the
contrary, he had attacked the mass of the parties, that he might be in a
situation to despise their leaders. Such had ever been the uniform
system of his internal policy; and, in spite of the last events, he was
far from repenting it; if he had to begin again he should pursue the
same course. “It is totally without reason,” he said, “that I have been
reproached with employing nobles and emigrants—a perfectly trite and
vulgar imputation! The fact is that under me there only existed
individual opinions and sentiments. It is not the nobles and the
emigrants who have brought about the restoration, but rather the
restoration that has again raised the nobles and the emigrants. They
have not contributed more particularly to our ruin than others: those
really in fault are the intriguers of all parties and all opinions.
Fouché was not a noble; Talleyrand was not an emigrant; Augereau and
Marmont were neither. To conclude, do you desire a final proof of the
injustice of blaming whole classes, when a revolution like ours has
operated in the midst of them? Reckon yourselves here: among four, you
find two nobles, one of whom was even an emigrant. The excellent M. de
Ségur, in spite of his age, at my departure, offered to follow me. I
could multiply examples without end.—It is with as little reason,” he
continued, "that I have been blamed for having neglected certain persons
of influence; I was too powerful not to despise with impunity the
intrigues, and the known immorality, of the greater part of them. None
of these causes have therefore contributed to my downfall; but only
unforeseen and unheard-of catastrophes; compulsory circumstances;
500,000 men at the gates of the capital; a revolution still recent; a
crisis too powerful for French heads; and, above all, a dynasty not
sufficiently ancient. I should have risen again even from the foot of
the Pyrenees, could I but have been my own grandson.

"And, moreover, what a fascination there is respecting past times! It is
most certain that I was chosen by the French: their new worship was
their own work. Well! immediately upon the return of their old forms,
see with what facility they have returned to their idols.

"And, after all, how could another line of policy have prevented that
which ruined me? I have been betrayed by M—— whom I might call my son,
my offspring, my own work; him to whom I had committed my destinies, by
sending him to Paris, at the very moment that he was putting the
finishing hand to his treason and my ruin. I have been betrayed by
Murat, whom I had raised from a soldier to a king; who was my sister’s
husband. I have been betrayed by Berthier, a mere goose, whom I had
converted into a kind of eagle. I have been betrayed in the senate, by
those very men of the national party who owe every thing to me. All
that, then, did not in any way depend upon my system of internal policy.
Undoubtedly I should have been exposed to the charge of too readily
employing old enemies, whether nobles or emigrants, if a Macdonald, a
Valence,[5] a Montesquiou had betrayed me; but they were faithful: let
them object to me the stupidity of Murat, I can oppose to it the
intelligence of Marmont. I have, then, no cause to repent of my system
of internal policy."

Footnote 5:

  One day at Longwood running over the list of the senators who had
  signed the deposition, one of us pointed out the name of M. de
  Valence, signed as secretary. But another explained that this
  signature was false, that M. de Valence had complained of it, and
  protested against it. “It is very true,” said the Emperor, “I know it;
  he has behaved well; Valence was true to the nation.”

[Illustration:

  _Map_
  —of the—
  ISLAND OF SAINT HELENA.

  _Drawn for the
  MEMORIAL DE SAINTE HÉLÈNE_,

  _By an Engineer formerly of
  Napoleon’s Cabinet from the information
  contained in the work itself, and from
  particulars furnished by
  Mess^{rs}. Marchand, S^t Denis, Pierron,
  and others in Napoleon’s service._
]

             CHANCE OF DANGER IN BATTLE, &C.—THE BULLETINS

VERY CORRECT.

28th.—The Emperor during dinner was speaking of the probability of
danger in the Chinese ships, of which one in thirty perished, according
to the accounts he had received from some captains. This led him to the
chances of danger in battle, which he said were less than that. Wagram
was pointed out to him as a destructive battle; he did not estimate the
killed at more than 3,000, which was only a fiftieth: we were there
160,000. At Essling they were about 4000, we were 40,000: this was a
tenth; but it was one of the most severe battles. The others were
incomparably lower.

This brought on a conversation on the bulletins. The Emperor declared
them to be very correct: assured us that, excepting what the proximity
of the enemy compelled him to disguise, that when they came into their
hands they might not derive any information prejudicial to him from
them, all the remainder was very exact. At Vienna and throughout Germany
they did them more justice than among us. If they had acquired a bad
character in our armies—if it was a common saying, _as false as a
bulletin_, it was personal rivalships, party spirit, that had
established it: it was the wounded self-love of those who were not
mentioned in them, and who had, or fancied they had, a right to a place
there: and still more than all, our ridiculous national defect of having
no greater enemies to our successes and our glory than ourselves.

The Emperor after dinner played some games at chess. The day had been
very rainy: he was unwell and retired early.

                      UNHEALTHINESS OF THE ISLAND.

26th. The weather was still bad; it was impossible to set foot out of
doors. The rain and the damp invaded our pasteboard apartments. Every
one of us suffered in his health in consequence. The temperature here is
certainly mild, but the climate is among the most unwholesome. It is a
thing ascertained in the island, that few there attain the age of fifty;
hardly any that of sixty. Add to this, exclusion from the rest of the
world, physical privations, bad moral treatment, and it will result that
prisons in Europe are far preferable to liberty in St. Helena.

About four o’clock several Captains from China were brought to me, who
were to be presented to the Emperor. They had an opportunity of seeing
the smallness, the dampness, and bad state of my habitation. They
enquired how the Emperor found himself in point of health. It declined
visibly, I told them. Never did we hear a complaint from him: his great
soul suffered nothing to overcome it, and even contributed to deceive
him with respect to his own state: but we could see him decay very
perceptibly. I led them shortly after to the Emperor who was walking in
the garden. He seemed to me at that moment more disordered than usual.
He dismissed them in half an hour. He went in again, and took a bath.

Before and after dinner he seemed in low spirits and in pain. He began
to read to us _Les Femmes Savantes_; but at the second act he handed the
book to the Grand Marshal, and dozed upon the sofa during the reading of
the remainder.

                REMARKS OF THE EMPEROR ON HIS EXPEDITION
                              IN THE EAST.

30th–31st. This day the weather has continued very bad; we all suffered
from it: besides, we are absolutely eaten up with rats, fleas, and bugs:
our sleep is disturbed by them, so that the troubles by night are in
perfect harmony with those by day.

The weather changed entirely to fair on the 31st; we went out in the
carriage. The Emperor, in the course of conversation, observed, speaking
of Egypt and Syria, that if he had taken St. Jean d’Acre, as ought to
have been the case, he should have wrought a revolution in the East.
“The most trivial circumstances,” said he, "lead to the greatest events.
The weakness of the captain of a frigate, who stood out to sea instead
of forcing a passage into the harbour, some trifling impediments with
respect to some sloops or light vessels, prevented the face of the world
from being changed. Possessed of St. Jean d’Acre, the French army would
have flown to Damascus and Aleppo; in a twinkling it would have been on
the Euphrates; the Christians of Syria, the Druses, the Christians of
Armenia, would have joined it: nations were on the point of being
shaken." One of us having said that they would have speedily been
re-inforced with 100,000 men—"Say 600,000," replied the Emperor; “who
can calculate what it might have been? I should have reached
Constantinople and the Indies; I should have changed the face of the
world.”

                    SUMMARY OF THE LAST NINE MONTHS.

Nine months have already elapsed from the commencement of my Journal;
and I fear that, amid the heterogeneous matters that succeed without
order in it, I may have often lost sight of my principal, my only,
object—that which concerns Napoleon, and may serve to characterize him.
It is to make up for this, where necessary, that I here attempt a
summary in a few words; a summary which I propose, moreover, on the same
account, to repeat, in future, at intervals of three months.

On quitting France, we remained for a month at the disposal of the
brutal and ferocious English Ministry; then our passage to St. Helena
occupied three months.

On our landing we occupied Briars nearly two months.

Lastly, we have been three months at Longwood.

Now, these nine months would have formed four very distinct epochs, with
one who had taken the pains to observe Napoleon.

All the time of our stay at Plymouth, Napoleon remained thoughtful, and
merely passive, exerting no power but that of patience. His misfortunes
were so great, and so incapable of remedy, that he suffered events to
take their course with stoic indifference.

During the whole of our passage, he constantly possessed a perfect
equanimity, and, above all, the most complete indifference; he expressed
no wish, shewed no disappointment. It is true, the greatest respect was
paid him; he received it without perceiving it; he spoke little, and the
subject was always foreign to himself. Any one who, coming suddenly on
board, had witnessed his conversation, would undoubtedly have been far
from guessing with whom they were in company: it was not the Emperor. I
cannot better picture him in this situation than by comparing him to
those passengers of high distinction who are conveyed with great respect
to their destination.

Our abode at Briars presented another shade of difference. Napoleon,
left almost entirely to himself, receiving nobody, constantly employed,
seeming to forget events and men, enjoyed, apparently, the calm and the
peace of a profound solitude; either from abstraction or contempt, not
condescending to notice the inconveniences or privations with which he
was surrounded. If he now and then dropped an expression relative to
them, it was only when roused by the importunity of some Englishman, or
excited by the recital of the outrages suffered by his attendants. His
whole day was occupied in dictation; the rest of the time dedicated to
the relaxation of familiar conversation. He never mentioned the affairs
of Europe; spoke rarely of the Empire, very little of the Consulate; but
much of his situation as General in Italy; still more, and almost
constantly, of the minutest details of his childhood and his early
youth. The latter subjects, especially, seemed at this time to have a
peculiar charm for him. One would have said that they afforded him a
perfect oblivion; they excited him even to gaiety. It was almost
exclusively with these objects that he employed the many hours of his
nightly walks by moonlight.

Finally, our establishment at Longwood was a fourth and last change. All
our situations hitherto had been but short and transitory. This was
fixed, and threatened to be lasting. There, in reality, were to commence
our exile and our new destinies. History will take them up there; there
the eyes of the world were to be directed to consider us. The Emperor,
seeming to make this calculation, regulates all about him, and takes the
attitude of dignity oppressed by power; he traces around him a moral
boundary, behind which he defends himself, inch by inch, against
indignity and insult. He no longer gives way on any point to his
persecutors; he shews himself sensibly jealous in respect to forms, and
hostile to all encroachment. The English never doubted that habit would,
in the end, produce formality. The Emperor brings them to it from the
first day, and the most profound respect is manifested.

It was no small surprise to us, and no slight satisfaction to have to
observe among ourselves, that, without knowing how or why, it was
nevertheless perceptible that the Emperor now stood higher in the
opinion and the respect of the English than he had hitherto done: we
could even perceive that this sentiment was every day increasing. With
us the Emperor resumed entirely, in his conversations, the examination
of the affairs of Europe. He analyzed the projects and the conduct of
the Sovereigns: he compared them with his own; weighed, decided, spoke
of his reign, of his deeds; in a word, we once more found him the
Emperor, and _all_ Napoleon. Not that he had ever ceased to be so for an
instant, as regarded our devotion and our attentions; neither had we, on
our side, had any thing to endure from him in any respect.

Never did we experience a more even temper, a more constant kindness, a
more unaltered affection. It was, in fact, among us, as in the midst of
his family, that he concerted his attacks upon the common enemy; and
those which appear the most vigorous, and seem to be dictated by anger,
were, however, almost always accompanied with some laughter or
pleasantry.

The Emperor’s health, during the six months preceding our establishment
at Longwood, did not seem to undergo any change; though his regimen was
so completely altered. His hours, his food, were no longer the same; his
habits were completely deranged. He who had been accustomed to so much
exercise had been confined all this time to a room. Bathing had become
part of his existence, and he was constantly deprived of it. It was not
till after his arrival at Longwood, and when he was again supplied with
some of these things, when he rode on horseback, and returned to the use
of the bath, that we began to perceive a sensible alteration.

It is a singular circumstance that, so long as he was uncomfortably
situated he suffered nothing; it was not till he was better off that he
was seen to be in pain. May it not be that, in the moral as in the
physical system, there is often a long interval between causes and their
effects?

DESCRIPTION OF THE EMPEROR’S APARTMENTS.—MINUTE DETAILS OF HIS TOILET
  AND DRESS.—ABSURD REPORTS RESPECTING HIM.—CONSPIRACIES OF GEORGES AND
  CERACHI.—ATTEMPT OF THE FANATIC OF SCHÖNBRUNN.

April 1st—2nd. All that is in any way connected with the Emperor
Napoleon must be worthy of observation, and will be held valuable by
thousands. With this conviction, I shall proceed minutely to describe
his apartment, its furniture, the details of his toilet, &c. And, in
course of time, may not his son one day take pleasure in re-producing
these details, picturing to himself the appearance of distant objects,
and seizing fleeting shadows, which to him will perhaps supply the place
of reality?

The Emperor’s own apartments consist of two chambers _A_ and _B_,[6]
each 45 feet long and 42 broad, and about 7 feet high. A very
indifferent carpet covers the floor, and pieces of nankin, instead of
paper, line the walls of both rooms.

Footnote 6:

  See the plan of Longwood.

The bed-chamber _A_ contains the little camp-bed _a_, in which the
Emperor sleeps, and the couch _b_, on which he reclines the greater part
of the day. This couch is covered with books, which seem to dispute with
the Emperor the right of possession to it. Beside this couch stands a
small table _c_, on which the Emperor breakfasts and dines, when he
takes his meals in his own chamber, and which, in the evening, bears a
candlestick with three branches, surmounted by a large ornament. Between
the two windows, and opposite to the door, stands a chest of drawers
_d_, containing the Emperor’s linen, and on the top of which is his
large dressing-case.

Over the fire-place _e_, hangs a very small glass, together with several
pictures. On the right is a portrait of the King of Rome sitting on a
sheep, by Aimée Thiebault—and on the left hangs, as a pendant to it,
another portrait of the young Prince, sitting on a cushion and putting
on a slipper. This picture is also the production of Thiebault. Lower
down is a small marble bust of the King of Rome. Two candlesticks, two
scent-bottles, and two cups of silver gilt, taken from the Emperor’s
cabinet, complete the arrangement and decoration of the chimney-piece.
Lastly, at the foot of the couch, and directly in view of the Emperor
when he reposes on it, which he does the greater part of the day, hangs
Isabey’s portrait of Maria Louisa, holding her son in her arms. This
wretched little closet has thus become a family sanctuary. I must not
omit to mention Frederick the Great’s large silver watch, which is a
sort of alarum. It was taken at Potsdam and it hangs on the left of the
chimney-piece, beyond the portraits. The Emperor’s own watch, which
hangs on the right of the chimney, is the same that he used in the
Campaigns of Italy; it is enclosed in a gold case, marked with his
cipher B:[7] These are the contents of the first chamber.

Footnote 7:

  I have since learned that this watch, the faithful companion of his
  wonderful achievements during the Campaigns in Italy and Egypt, has
  passed into the hands of the Grand Marshal.—The Emperor complained
  that his watch did not go, or that it went ill; and we had in vain
  endeavoured to get it set to rights: when one day, looking at a watch
  which General Bertrand had just received from the Cape, he said: “I
  shall keep this and give you mine: it does not go now, but it struck
  two on the _plateau_ of Rivoli, when I gave orders for the operations
  of the day.”

In the second room _B_, which serves as a sort of study, along the walls
next the windows are several rough boards, supported by trestles, on
which are scattered a great number of books, and the manuscripts that
have been written from the Emperor’s dictation. Between the two windows
is a book-case _g_; and on the opposite side stands another
camp-bedstead _h_, similar to the one already mentioned. On this bed the
Emperor sometimes reposes in the day-time; and he occasionally lies down
on it, when he rises from the other bed during his frequent sleepless
nights, or when fatigued with dictating, or walking about alone in his
chamber. Lastly, in the middle of the room stands the writing-table _i_,
with marks indicating the places usually occupied by the Emperor and
each of us during his dictations.

The Emperor dresses in his bed-room. When he takes off his clothes,
which he does without assistance, he throws them all upon the floor if
one of his valets happens not to be at hand to take them from him. How
many times have I stooped to pick up the cordon of the Legion of Honour,
when I have seen it thrown carelessly on the ground!

Shaving, which is almost the last business of the Emperor’s toilet, is
not commenced until he has put on his stockings, shoes, &c. He shaves
himself: first taking off his shirt, and retaining only his flannel
waistcoat, which he had laid aside during the excessive heat we
experienced in crossing the Line, but which he was obliged to resume at
Longwood, in consequence of a severe attack of the cholic; from this,
however, the use of his flannel waistcoat speedily relieved him.

The Emperor shaves in the recess of the window nearest to the
fire-place. His first valet de chambre hands him the soap and razor: and
the second holds before him the looking-glass of his dressing-case, so
that the Emperor may turn to the light the side that he is shaving. It
is the business of the second valet de chambre to tell him whether or
not he shaves clean. Having shaved one side, he turns completely round
to shave the other, and the valets change sides.

The Emperor then washes his face, and very frequently his head, in a
large silver basin _f_, which is fixed in a corner of the room, and
which was brought from the Elysée. The Emperor is very lusty; his skin
is white, with but few hairs; and he has a certain plumpness which is
unusual in the male sex, and to which he sometimes jokingly alludes. He
rubs his chest and arms with a tolerably hard brush. He afterwards gives
the brush to his valet de chambre, who rubs his back and shoulders, and
when in good humour he often says, “Come, brush hard—as hard as if you
were scrubbing an ass.”

He used almost to drown himself in _eau de Cologne_, at least, so long
as he had any at his disposal: but his store of this article was
speedily exhausted, and as none could be procured on the island, he was
reduced to the necessity of using lavender water; the want of _eau de
Cologne_ he felt as a severe privation.

After he has had his back rubbed, or after he has finished shaving each
side of his beard, he sometimes good-humouredly looks his valet in the
face for a few seconds, and then gives him a smart box on the ear,
accompanied by some jocular expressions. This has been construed by
libelists and pamphleteers into the habit of cruelly beating those who
were about him. We all in our turns occasionally received a pinch or a
box on the ear; but from the expressions which always accompanied the
action, we thought ourselves very happy in receiving such favours during
the period of his power.

This calls to my recollection, and explains to me certain observations
which I once heard from the Duke Decrès, one of the Emperor’s ministers.
The Duke, when in the height of his glory and power, wished to obtain a
certain favour from the Emperor. He was conversing with me on the
subject, and after adverting to all his chances of success, he said: “I
shall have it after all, the first time I get roughly treated.” And,
remarking that my countenance expressed surprise, he added with a
significant smile: "But, my dear fellow, after all ’tis not so terrible
a thing as you imagine; many would be happy to receive such usage, I
assure you." ...

The Emperor does not leave his chamber until he is completely dressed.
He wears shoes in the morning, and does not put on his boots until he
rides out on horseback. When he first came to Longwood, he laid aside
his green uniform of the Guard, and wore a hunting coat the lace of
which had been taken off. This coat soon began to look shabby, and his
attendants were at a loss what to substitute for it. This, however, was
not the only inconvenience of the kind to which he was exposed. For
instance, we were much distressed to see him reduced to the necessity of
wearing one pair of silk stockings for several days in succession; but
he laughed whenever we expressed our regret on this subject, or remarked
that it was easy to count the number of days the stockings had been
worn, by the marks which the shoes had left on them. In other respects
he retained his usual dress; namely, waistcoat and small clothes of
white kerseymere, and a black cravat. When he was going out, any one of
the gentlemen who happened to be in the room handed to him his hat; that
little hat which has in some measure become identified with his person.
Several of the Emperor’s hats have been carried off since we have been
on the island; for every individual who approaches him is anxious to
obtain some token of remembrance of him. How often have we been
tormented even by persons of distinguished rank, to procure for them
even a button of his coat or any other trifle belonging to him.

I was almost always present at the Emperor’s toilet: sometimes I
remained after having finished my writing, and sometimes the Emperor
desired me to come and chat with him. One day I was looking steadfastly
at him as he put on his flannel waistcoat. My countenance I suppose
expressed something particular, for he said in his good humoured way of
addressing me: “Well, what does _your Excellency_ smile at? What are you
thinking of at this moment.”—"Sire, in a pamphlet which I lately read, I
found it stated that your Majesty was shielded by a coat of mail for the
security of your person. A report of the same kind was circulated among
certain classes in Paris; and in support of the assertion, allusion was
made to your Majesty’s sudden _embonpoint_, which was said to be quite
unnatural. I was just now thinking that I could bear positive evidence
to the contrary, and that at St. Helena, at least, all precautions for
personal safety have been laid aside."—"This is one of the thousand
absurdities that have been published respecting me," said he. "But the
story you have just mentioned is the more ridiculous, since every person
about me well knows how careless I am in regard to self-preservation.
Accustomed from the age of eighteen to be exposed to cannon-balls, and
knowing the inutility of precautions, I abandoned myself to my fate.
When I came to the head of affairs, I might still have fancied myself
surrounded by the danger of the field of battle: and I might have
regarded the conspiracies that were formed against me as so many
bomb-shells. But I followed my old course; I trusted to my lucky star;
and left all precautions to the police. I was perhaps the only sovereign
in Europe who dispensed with a body guard. Every one could freely
approach me without having, as it were, to pass through military
barracks; the sentinels at the outer gates being passed, all had free
access to every part of my palace. Maria Louisa was much astonished to
see me so poorly guarded; and she often remarked that her father was
surrounded by bayonets. For my part, I had no better defence at the
Tuileries than I have here: I don’t even know where to find my sword; do
you see it?" said he, looking about for it.... “I have, to be sure,” he
continued, "incurred great dangers. Upwards of thirty plots were formed
against me: these have been proved by authentic testimony, without
mentioning many that never came to light. Some sovereigns invent
conspiracies against themselves; for my part, I made it a rule carefully
to conceal them whenever I could. The crisis most serious to me was
during the interval between the battle of Marengo and the attempt of
Georges, and the affair of the Duke d’Enghien."

Napoleon related that about a week before the arrest of Georges, a
petition had been delivered into his own hands, on the parade, by one of
the most determined of the conspirators. Others insinuated themselves
among the household at St. Cloud or Malmaison; finally Georges himself
seems to have been so near his person as to have been in the same
apartment with him.

Independently of good luck, the Emperor attributes his safety, in a
great measure, to certain circumstances which were peculiar to himself.
That which had doubtless, he said, contributed to preserve him was his
having lived after his own fancy; without any regular habits or fixed
plan. His close occupations kept him much at home, and almost constantly
confined him to his closet. He never dined abroad, seldom visited the
theatres, and never appeared but at those times and places at which he
was not expected.

As we were descending to the garden after the Emperor had finished
dressing, he observed to me that the two designs on his life which had
placed him in the most imminent danger were those of Cerachi the
sculptor, and the fanatic of Schönbrunn. Cerachi, and some other
desperate wretches, had laid a plan for assassinating the First Consul.
They agreed to carry their design into execution at the moment of his
withdrawing from his box at the theatre. Napoleon, who received
intimation of the plot nevertheless proceeded to the theatre, and
fearlessly passed by the conspirators, who had shown themselves most
eager to occupy their respective stations. They were not arrested until
about the middle or near the close of the performance.

Cerachi, said the Emperor, had formerly adored the First Consul; but he
vowed to sacrifice him, when, as he pretended, he proved himself a
tyrant. This artist had been loaded with favours by General Bonaparte,
whose bust he had executed; and, when he entered into the plot against
his benefactor, he endeavoured by every possible means to procure
another sitting, under pretence of making an essential improvement on
the bust. Fortunately, at that time, the Consul had not a single
moment’s leisure, and, thinking that want was the real cause of the
urgent solicitations of the sculptor, he sent him six thousand francs.
But how was he mistaken! Cerachi’s real motive was to stab him during
the sitting.

The conspiracy was disclosed by a captain of the line, who was himself
an accomplice. “This,” said Napoleon, “was a proof of the strange
modifications of which the human mind is susceptible, and shows to what
lengths the combinations of folly and stupidity may be carried! This
officer regarded me with horror as First Consul, though he had adored me
as a General. He wished to see me driven from my post, but he rejected
the idea of any attempt upon my life. He wished that I should be
secured, but would not have me injured in any way; and he proposed that
I should be sent back to the army to face the enemy and defend the glory
of France. The rest of the conspirators laughed at these notions; but,
when he found that they were distributing poniards and going far beyond
his intentions, he then came and disclosed the whole to the Consul.”

As we were discoursing on this subject, some one present mentioned
having witnessed at the Theatre Feydeau, a circumstance which threw a
part of the audience into the greatest consternation. The Emperor
entered the Empress Josephine’s box, and had scarcely taken his seat,
when a young man hastily jumped upon the bench immediately below the
Box, and placed his hand on the Emperor’s breast. The spectators on the
opposite side were filled with alarm. Fortunately, however, the young
man was merely presenting a petition, which the Emperor received and
read with the utmost coolness.

The Emperor described the _Fanatic of Schönbrunn_, as the son of a
protestant minister of Erfurt, who, about the time of the battle of
Wagram, had laid a plan for the assassination of Napoleon, with all due
parade. He had passed the sentinels at some distance from the Emperor,
and had twice or thrice been driven back, when General Rapp, in the act
of pushing him aside with his hand, felt something concealed under his
coat. This proved to be a knife about a foot and a half long, pointed,
and sharp at both edges. “I shuddered to look at it,” said the Emperor;
“it was merely rolled up in a piece of newspaper.”

Napoleon ordered the assassin to be brought into his closet. He called
Corvisart, and directed him to feel the criminal’s pulse while he spoke
to him. The assassin stood unmoved, confessing his intended crime, and
frequently making quotations from the Bible. “What was your purpose
here?” enquired the Emperor. “To kill you.” “What have I done to offend
you? By whose authority do you constitute yourself my Judge?”—"I wish to
put an end to the war." “And why not address yourself to the Emperor
Francis?” “To him!” said the assassin, “and wherefore? he is a mere
cipher. And besides, if he were dead, another would succeed him; but,
when you are gone, the French will immediately retire from Germany.” The
Emperor vainly endeavoured to move him. “Do you repent?” said he. “No.”
“Would you again attempt the perpetration of your intended crime?”
“Yes.” “What, if I were to pardon you?” Here, said the Emperor, nature
for an instant resumed her sway; the man’s countenance and voice
underwent a momentary change. “Even though you do,” said he, “God will
not forgive me.” But he immediately resumed his ferocious expression. He
was kept in solitary confinement and without food for four-and-twenty
hours. The Doctor examined him once more. He was again questioned, but
all was unavailing; he still remained the same man, or, to speak more
properly, the same ferocious brute. He was at length abandoned to his
fate.

              MEASURES THAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN ADOPTED AFTER
                        THE BATTLE OF WATERLOO.

3rd.—In the morning the Emperor dictated in the shady part of the
garden. The day was delightfully clear and serene. He had been reading
the account of Alexander’s expedition in Rollin’s History; and had
several maps spread out before him. He complained that the narrative was
destitute of taste, and without any proper plan. He observed that it
afforded no just idea of the grand views of Alexander; and he expressed
a wish himself to write an account of the expedition.

About five o’clock, I joined him in the garden, where he was walking,
attended by all the gentlemen. As soon as he perceived me, he said:
“Come, we must have your opinion on a point which we have been
discussing for the last hour. On my return from Waterloo, do you think I
could have dismissed the Legislative Body, and have saved France without
it?”—"No," I replied, “it would not have been dissolved voluntarily. You
would have found it necessary to employ force; which would have excited
protestations, and would have been regarded as scandalous. The
dissatisfaction excited in the Legislative Body would have spread
through the whole nation. Meanwhile the enemy would have arrived; and
your Majesty must have succumbed, accused by all Europe, accused by
foreigners, and even by Frenchmen; perhaps loaded with universal
maledictions, regarded merely as an adventurer carrying every thing by
violence. But as it was, your Majesty issued pure and unsullied from the
conflict, and your memory will be everlastingly cherished in the hearts
of those who respect the cause of the people. Your Majesty has, by your
moderation, ensured to yourself the brightest character in history,
while, by a different line of conduct, you might have incurred the risk
of reprobation. You have lost your power, it is true; but you have
attained the summit of your glory.”

“Well, this is partly my own opinion,” said the Emperor. "But after all,
am I certain that the French people will do me justice? Will they not
accuse me of having abandoned them? History will decide! Instead of
dreading, I invoke, its decree!—I have often asked myself whether I have
done for the French people all that they could expect of me; for that
people did much for me. Will they ever know all that I suffered during
the night that preceded my final decision?

"In that night of anguish and uncertainty, I had to choose between two
great courses: the one was to endeavour to save France by violence; and
the other was to yield to the general impulse. The measure which I
pursued was, I think, most advisable. Friends and enemies, the good and
the evil disposed, all were against me, and I stood alone. I could not
but yield, and my decision being once adopted, could not be revoked. I
am not one who takes half measures; and, besides, sovereignty is not to
be thrown off and on like one’s cloak. The other course demanded
extraordinary severity. It would have been necessary to arraign great
criminals and to decree great punishments. Blood must have been shed;
and then who can tell where we should have stopped! What scenes of
horror might not have been renewed! By pursuing this line of conduct,
should I not have drowned my memory in the deluge of blood, crimes, and
abominations of every kind, with which libellers have already
overwhelmed me? Should I not thereby have seemed to justify all that
they have been pleased to invent? Posterity and History would have
viewed me as a second Nero or Tiberius. If, after all, I could have
saved France at such a price!... I had energy sufficient to carry me
through every difficulty!... But, is it certain that I should have
succeeded? All our dangers did not come from without; the worst existed
in our internal discord. Did not a party of mad fools dispute about
shades, before they had ensured the triumph of the colour? How would it
have been possible to persuade them that I was not labouring for myself
alone, for my own personal advantage? How could I convince them of my
disinterestedness, or prove that all my efforts were directed to save
the country? To whom could I point out the dangers and miseries from
which I sought to rescue the French people? They were evident to me, but
the vulgar mass will ever remain in ignorance of them until they are
crushed beneath their weight.

“What answer could be given to those who exclaimed: Behold the despot,
the tyrant! again violating the oaths which he took but yesterday! and
who knows whether amidst this tumult, this inextricable complication of
difficulties, I might not have perished by the hand of a Frenchman, in
the civil conflict! Then how would France have appeared in the eyes of
the universe, in the estimation of future generations? The glory of
France is to identify herself with me. I could not have achieved so many
great deeds for her honour and glory without the nation, and in spite of
the nation. France was inclined to elevate me to too high a point!... As
I said before, History will decide!...”

He then adverted to the plan and details of the Campaign, dwelling with
pleasure on its glorious commencement, and with regret on the terrible
disaster that marked its close.

“Still,” continued he, "I should have considered the state of affairs as
by no means desperate, had I obtained the aid I expected. All our
resources rested in the Chambers. I hastened to convince them of this;
but they immediately rose against me, under pretence that I was come to
dissolve them. What an absurdity! From that moment all was lost.[8]

Footnote 8:

  Time, which explains all things, has shewn the little springs which
  brought about one of our greatest catastrophes. I received the
  following particulars from one who acted a part in the events of the
  day:—

  On hearing that Napoleon had arrived at the Elysée from Waterloo,
  Fouché flew to the dissatisfied and suspicious Members of the Chambers
  exclaiming, “To arms! He has returned desperate, and is about to
  dissolve the Chambers and seize the dictatorship. We cannot endure the
  restoration of tyranny.” He then hastened to the best friends of
  Napoleon. “Are you aware,” said he, “what a terrible fermentation has
  risen up against the Emperor among certain deputies? We can only save
  Napoleon by facing them boldly, by showing them the full power of our
  party, and how easily the Chambers may be dissolved.”

  The friends of Napoleon, easily duped in this sudden crisis, failed
  not to follow, perhaps even to overstep, the suggestions of Fouché,
  who now returned to the distrustful party and said, “You see his best
  friends are agreed on this point: the danger is urgent: and in a few
  hours there will be no remedy. The Chambers will be no more, and we
  shall be very culpable in letting slip the only opportunity of
  opposing him.” Thus the permanence of the Chambers, the forced
  abdication of the Emperor, and the downfall of a great empire, were
  brought about by petty intrigue, by ante-chamber report and gossip.
  Ah, Fouché! how well the Emperor knew you, when he said, that your
  ugly foot was sure to be thrust into every body’s shoes.

“It would perhaps be unjust,” added the Emperor, "to accuse the majority
of the Members of the Chambers; but such is the nature of all numerous
bodies that they must perish, if disunited. Like armies, they must have
leaders. The chiefs of armies are appointed; but, in constituted bodies,
men of eminent talent and genius rise up and rule them. We wanted all
this, and, therefore, in spite of the good spirit which might have
animated the majority, all were, in an instant, plunged into confusion
and tumult. The Legislative Body had perfidy and corruption stationed at
its doors, while incapacity, disorder, and perversity prevailed in its
bosom; and thus France became the prey of foreigners.

"For a moment, I entertained the idea of resistance. I was on the point
of declaring myself permanently at the Tuileries, along with my
Ministers and Councillors of State. I had thoughts of rallying round me
the six thousand guards who were in Paris, augmenting them with the best
disposed portion of the National Guard, who were very numerous, and the
federate troops of the Faubourgs; of adjourning the Legislative Body to
Tours or Blois; re-organizing before the walls of Paris, the wrecks of
the army, and thus exerting my efforts singly, as a Dictator, for the
welfare of the country. But would the Legislative Body have obeyed? I
might have enforced obedience, it is true; but this would have been a
new cause of scandal, and a fresh source of difficulties. Would the
people have made common cause with me? Would even the army have
continued constantly faithful to me? In the succession of events, might
not both the people and the army have been separated from me? Might not
plans have been arranged to my prejudice? The idea that so many dangers
were caused by me alone might have served as a plausible pretext, and
the facilities which every one had experienced during the preceding year
in gaining favour with the Bourbons, might to many have become decisive
inducements.

“Yes,” continued the Emperor, "I hesitated long, I weighed every
argument on both sides; and I at length concluded that I could not make
head against the coalition without and the royalists within: that I
should be unable to oppose the numerous sects which would have been
created by the violence committed on the Legislative Body, to control
that portion of the multitude which must be driven by force, or to
resist that moral condemnation which imputes to him who is unfortunate
every evil that ensues. Abdication was therefore absolutely the only
step I could adopt. All was lost in spite of me. I foresaw and foretold
this: but still I had no other alternative.

“The Allies always pursued the same system against me. They began it at
Prague, continued it at Frankfort, at Chatillon, at Paris, and at
Fontainbleau. Their conduct displayed considerable judgment. The French
might have been duped in 1814; but it is difficult to conceive how they
could have been deceived in 1815. History will for ever tarnish the
memory of those who suffered themselves to be misled. I foretold their
fate when I was departing to join the army: _Let us not resemble_, I
said, _the Greeks of the Lower Empire, who amused themselves in debating
while the battering-ram was levelling the walls of their city_. And,
when forced to abdicate, I said, _Our enemies wish to separate me from
the army; when they shall have succeeded, they will separate the army
from you. You will then be merely a wretched flock, the prey of wild
beasts._”

We asked the Emperor whether he thought that, with the concurrence of
the Legislative Body, he could have saved France? He replied, without
hesitation, that he would confidently have undertaken to do so, and that
he would have answered for his success.

“In less than a fortnight,” continued he, "that is to say, before any
considerable mass of the allied force could have assembled before Paris,
I should have completed my fortifications, and have collected before the
walls of the city, and out of the wrecks of the army, upwards of eighty
thousand good troops, and three hundred pieces of horse artillery. After
a few days’ firing, the national guard, the federal troops, and the
inhabitants of Paris, would have sufficed to defend the entrenchments. I
should have had eighty thousand disposable troops at my command. It is
well known how advantageously I was capable of employing this force.—The
achievements of 1814 were still fresh in remembrance. Champaubert,
Montmirail, Craon, Montereau, were still present in the imagination of
our enemies; the same scenes would have revived the recollection of the
prodigies of the preceding year. I was then surnamed the _hundred
thousand men_.

"The rapidity and decision of our successes gave rise to this name. The
conduct of the French troops was most admirable. Never did a handful of
brave men accomplish so many miracles. If their high achievements have
never been publicly known, owing to the circumstances which attended our
disasters, they have at least been duly appreciated by our enemies, who
counted the number of our attacks by our victories. We were truly the
heroes of fable!

“Paris,” said he, "would in a few days have become impregnable. The
appeal to the nation, the magnitude of the danger, the excitement of the
public mind, the grandeur of the spectacle, would have drawn multitudes
to the capital. I could undoubtedly have assembled upwards of four
hundred thousand men, and I imagine the allied force did not exceed five
hundred thousand. Thus the affair would have been brought to a single
combat, in which the enemy would have had as much to fear as ourselves.
He would have hesitated, and thus I should have regained the confidence
of the majority.

“Meanwhile I should have surrounded myself with a national senate or
junta selected from among the members of the Legislative Body—men
distinguished by national names, and worthy of general confidence. I
should have fortified my military Dictatorship with all the strength of
civil opinion. I should have had my tribune, which would have
promulgated the talisman of my principles through Europe. The Sovereigns
would have trembled to behold the contagion spread among their subjects.
They must have treated with me, or have surrendered....”

“But, Sire,” we exclaimed, “why did you not attempt what would
infallibly have succeeded?—Why are we here?”

“Now,” resumed the Emperor, “you are blaming and condemning me! But, if
you were to take a view of the contrary chances, you would change your
tone. Besides, you forget that we reasoned on the hypothesis that the
Legislative Body would have joined me; but you know what line of conduct
it pursued. I might have dissolved it, to be sure. France and Europe
perhaps blame me, and posterity will doubtless censure my weakness, in
not breaking up the Legislative Body after its insurrection. It will be
said, that I ought not to have separated myself from the destinies of a
people who had done all for me. But by dissolving the Assembly, I could
at most have obtained only a capitulation from the enemy. In that case,
I again repeat, blood must have been shed, and I must have proved myself
a tyrant. I had however arranged a plan on the night of the 20th, and on
the 21st measures of the most rigid severity were to have been adopted;
but before the return of day, the dictates of humanity and prudence
warned me that such a course was not to be thought of, that I should
miss my aim, and that every one was merely seeking blindly to
accommodate himself to circumstances. But I must not begin again. I have
already said too much on a subject which always revives painful
recollections. I repeat once more that History will decide.”—The Emperor
returned to his chamber desiring me to follow him. . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4th. At 5 o’clock I went to meet the Emperor in the garden. He had taken
too warm a bath, and in consequence found himself ill. We rode out in
the calash, the weather was delightful: for several days it had been
very warm and dry. Before dinner the Emperor dictated to the Grand
Marshal. Madame Bertrand dined at the Admiral’s. The Emperor withdrew to
his chamber immediately after dinner.

                         CHARACTERISTIC TRAITS.

5th—8th. During these four days, the Emperor invariably rode out on
horseback about six or seven in the morning, accompanied only by me and
my son.

I am enabled to affirm that I never saw Napoleon swayed either by
passion or prejudice, that is to say, I never knew him to pronounce a
judgment on men and things that was not dictated by reason. Even when he
displays what perhaps may be called anger, it is merely the effect of
transitory feeling, and never influences his actions; but I can truly
say that, during the eighteen years in which I have had the opportunity
of observing his character, I never knew him to act in contradiction to
reason.

Another fact which has come to my knowledge, and which I note down here
because it recurs to my memory at this moment, is that, either from
nature, calculation, or the habit of preserving dignity, he for the most
part represses and conceals the painful sensations which he experiences,
and still more, perhaps, the kind emotions of his heart. I have
frequently observed him repressing feelings of sensibility, as if he
thought that they compromised his character. Of this I shall hereafter
adduce proofs. Meanwhile, the following characteristic trait so
perfectly corresponds with the object of this journal, namely, that of
showing the man as he really is, and seizing nature in the fact, that I
cannot refrain from mentioning it.

For some days past, Napoleon seemed to have something deeply at heart. A
domestic circumstance which had occurred vexed and ruffled him
exceedingly. During the last three days, in our rides about the park, he
several times alluded to this circumstance with considerable warmth,
desiring me to keep close by his side, and ordering my son to ride on
before. On one of these occasions the following observation escaped
him:—"I know I am fallen. But to feel this among you!"... These words,
the gesture, the tone that accompanied them, pierced my very heart. I
was ready to throw myself at his feet, and embrace his knees. “I know,”
continued he, “that man is frequently unreasonable and susceptible.
Thus, when I am mistrustful of myself, I asked, should I have been
treated so at the Tuileries? This is my sure test.”

He then spoke of himself, of us, of our reciprocal relations, of our
situation in the island, and the influence which our individual
circumstances might enable us to exercise. His reflections on these
subjects were numerous, powerful, and just. In the emotion with which
this conversation inspired me, I exclaimed: “Sire, permit me to take
this affair upon myself. It certainly never could have been viewed in
this light. If the matter were explained, I am sure it would excite deep
sorrow and repentance! I only ask permission to say a single word.” The
Emperor replied with dignity:—"No, sir; I forbid it. I have opened my
heart to you. Nature has had her course. I shall forget it; and you must
seem never to have known it."

On our return, we breakfasted all together in the garden, and the
Emperor was more than usually cheerful. In the evening he dined in his
own apartment.

              POLITICS.—THE STATE OF EUROPE.—IRRESISTIBLE
                    ASCENDANCY OF LIBERAL OPINIONS.

9th-10th. On the 9th a ship arrived from England, bringing papers to the
21st of January. The Emperor continued his morning rides on horseback,
and passed the rest of the day in examining the newspapers in his own
chamber. The contents of these late papers were not less interesting
than those which we had already examined. The agitation in France
continued to increase; the King of Prussia had issued proclamations
respecting secret societies; a misunderstanding had arisen between
Austria and Bavaria; in England the persecution of the French
Protestants, and the violence of the party which was gaining the
ascendancy, agitated the public mind, and gave arms to the Opposition.
Europe never presented a more violent fermentation.

On perusing the account of the deluge of evils and sanguinary events
which overwhelmed all the French departments, the Emperor rose from his
couch, and, stamping his foot violently on the ground, he exclaimed!
“How unfortunate was I in not proceeding to America! From the other
hemisphere I might have protected France against re-action! The dread of
my re-appearance would have been a check on their violence and folly. My
name would have sufficed to bridle their excesses, and to fill them with
terror.”

Then, continuing the same subject, he said with a degree of warmth,
bordering on inspiration, "the counter-revolution, even had it been
suffered to proceed, must inevitably have been lost in the grand
revolution. The atmosphere of modern ideas is sufficient to stifle the
old feudalists; for henceforth nothing can destroy or efface the grand
principles of our revolution. Those great and excellent truths can never
cease to exist, so completely are they blended with our fame, our
monuments, and our prodigies. We have washed away their first stains in
the flood of glory, and they will henceforth be immortal. Created in the
French tribune, cemented with the blood of battles, adorned with the
laurels of victory, saluted with the acclamations of the people,
sanctioned by the treaties and alliances of Sovereigns, and having
become familiar to the ears as well as in the mouths of Kings, these
principles can never again retrograde!

“Liberal ideas flourish in Great Britain, they enlighten America, and
they are nationalized in France; and this may be called the tripod
whence issues the light of the world! Liberal opinions will rule the
universe. They will become the faith, the religion, the morality of all
nations; and, in spite of all that may be advanced to the contrary, this
memorable era will be inseparably connected with my name; for, after
all, it cannot be denied that I kindled the torch and consecrated the
principles; and now persecution renders me quite their Messiah. Friends
and foes, all must acknowledge me to be their first soldier, their grand
representative. Thus even when I shall be no more, I shall still
continue to be the leading star of the nations....”

THE EMPEROR’S OPINION OF SEVERAL CELEBRATED MEN.—POZZO DI
  BORGO—METTERNICH—BASSANO—CLARKE—CAMBACÉRÈS—LEBRUN—FOUCHÉ, &C.

11th—12th. The Emperor took advantage of every fine morning to ride on
horseback. He breakfasted in the garden; and the conversation was
afterwards maintained with great freedom and interest on the events of
his own private life, on public affairs, on the individuals who
surrounded his person, and those who have played a conspicuous part in
the other Courts of Europe.

The English lessons were no longer thought of; they were continued only
in our rides or walks during the day time. What the Emperor thus lost in
grammatical accuracy he gained in facility of expression.

About five o’clock on the 11th, we took our usual airing in the calash.
In the evening we resumed our ministerial anecdotes and conversations on
celebrated persons. Napoleon gave us the history of M. Pozzo di Borgo,
his countryman, who had been a Member of the Legislative Body. It was
he, it is said, who advised the Emperor Alexander to march upon Paris,
even though Napoleon should have attacked his rear. “And thus,” said the
Emperor, “he decided the fate of France, of European civilization, and
the destinies of the whole world. He had acquired great influence in the
Russian Cabinet."

He also gave us the history of M. Capo d’Istria. He then spoke of M. de
Metternich.

The Emperor next spoke of his own Ministers; of Bassano, whom he
believed to have been sincerely attached to him; Clarke, to whose
character Time, he said, would do ample justice; C.... whom late events
had shewn to have been worth but little. The Emperor had successively
appointed him Ambassador to Vienna, Minister of the interior, and
Minister for foreign affairs. Talleyrand, observed the Emperor,
described his character in a word, when he said of him, with his usual
point and ill-natured spirit, that he was a man who could make himself
fit for any place on the day before his appointment to it.

The conversation next turned on M. Cambacérès, whom Napoleon called the
man of abuses; observing that he had a decided inclination for the old
regime. Lebrun, on the contrary, had a predilection to the opposite
extreme. He, said the Emperor, was the man of idealisms. These two men,
he observed, were the counterpoises between which the First Consul had
placed himself, and he in his turn was humourously called _the
consolidated third_.

Messrs. de T.... and Fouché were next spoken of. After saying a great
deal respecting both, the Emperor proceeded to make some energetic
remarks on the morality of individuals connected with the ministry in
France, and generally of all functionaries or men in office; on their
want of political faith, or national feeling, which led them to serve
indifferently one person to-day, and another to-morrow. “This levity,
this inconsistency,” said he, “has descended to us from antiquity. We
still remain Gauls, and our character will never be complete, until we
learn to substitute principles for turbulence, pride for vanity, and,
above all, the love of institutions for the love of place.”

The Emperor concluded that, at the close of our late events, the
Monarchs of Europe must necessarily have retained a retrospective
feeling of scorn and contempt for the great people who had thus sported
with Sovereignty. “But,” said he, “the excuse may perhaps be found in
the nature of things, and in the power of circumstances. Democracy
raises up Sovereignty, aristocracy preserves it. Mine had neither taken
a root deep enough, nor acquired sufficient spirit. At the moment of the
crisis it was still connected with democracy; and it mingled with the
multitude instead of becoming the sheet-anchor to secure the people from
the fury of the tempest, and to guide them in their blindness.”

The following are some fresh particulars respecting M. de T—— and M.
Fouché, whose names have so frequently been mentioned. I endeavour as
much as possible to avoid repetitions.

“M. de T——” said the Emperor, “waited two days and nights at Vienna for
full powers to treat for peace in my name; but I should have been
ashamed to have thus prostituted my policy; and yet, perhaps, my conduct
in this instance has purchased my exile to St. Helena; for I cannot but
allow that T—— is a man of singular talent, and capable at all times of
throwing great weight into the scale.

“T——” continued he, “was always in a state treason; but it was in
partnership with fortune. His circumspection was extreme; he treated his
friends as if they might in future become his enemies; and he behaved to
his enemies as if they might some time or other become his friends. M.
de T—— had always been, in my opinion, hostile to the Faubourg St.
Germain. In the affair of the divorce, he was for the Empress Josephine.
It was he who urged the war with Spain, though in public he had the art
to appear averse to it.” Thus it was from a kind of spite that Napoleon
made choice of Valencey as the residence of Ferdinand. “In short,” said
the Emperor, “T—— was the principal instrument and the active cause of
the death of the Duke d’Enghien.”

[Illustration:

  Ch. Maurice de Talleyrand

  Engraved by Thomson, from the Original Painting by F. Gérard
]

Napoleon observed that a celebrated actress (Mademoiselle Raucourt) had
described him with great truth. “If you ask him a question,” said she,
“he is an iron chest, whence you cannot extract a syllable; but if you
ask him nothing, you will soon be unable to stop his mouth—he will
become a regular gossip.”

This was a foible which, at the outset, destroyed the confidence of the
Emperor, and made him waver in his opinion of T——. “I had entrusted
him,” said Napoleon, "with a very important affair, and, a few hours
afterwards, Josephine related it to me word for word. I instantly sent
for the Minister, to inform him that I had just learned from the Empress
a circumstance which I had told in confidence to himself alone. The
story had already passed through four or five intermediate channels.

"T——’s countenance," added the Emperor, “is so immoveable that nothing
can ever be read in it. Lannes and Murat used jokingly to say of him
that if, while he was speaking to you, some one should come behind him
and give him a kick, his countenance would betray no indication of the
affront.”

M. de T—— is mild and even endearing in his domestic habits. His
servants, and the persons in his employment, are attached and devoted to
him. Among his intimate friends he willingly and good-humouredly speaks
of his ecclesiastical profession. He one day expressed his dislike of a
tune which was hummed in his hearing. He said he had a great horror of
it; it reminded him of the time when he was obliged to practise
church-music, and to sing at the desk. On another occasion, one of his
intimate friends was telling a story during supper, while M. de T—— was
engaged in thought, and seemed inattentive to the conversation. In the
course of the story, the speaker happened to say in a lively manner of
some one whom he had named, “That fellow is a comical rogue; he is a
married priest.” T——, roused by these words, seized a spoon, plunged it
hastily into the dish before him, and with a threatening aspect called
out to him, “Mr. Such-a-one, will you have some spinach?” The person who
was telling the story was confounded, and all the party burst into a fit
of laughter, M. de T—— as well as the rest.

The Emperor, at the time of the Concordat, wished to have made M. de
T.... a Cardinal, and to have placed him at the head of ecclesiastical
affairs. He told him that his proper destiny was to return to the bosom
of the Church, to refresh his memory, and to stop the mouths of the
declaimers. T——, however, would never agree to this; his aversion to the
ecclesiastical profession was insurmountable.

Napoleon was very near appointing him Ambassador to Warsaw, a dignity
which he subsequently conferred on the Abbé de Pradt; but his dirty
stock-jobbing tricks, as the Emperor called them, occasioned this
intention to be abandoned. The Emperor was induced by the same reasons,
and at the instance of several sovereigns of Germany, to deprive him of
the portfolio of Foreign Affairs.

The Emperor remarked that Fouché was the T—— of the clubs, and that T——
was the Fouché of the drawing-rooms. “Intrigue,” he said, "was to Fouché
a necessary of life. He intrigued at all times, in all places, in all
ways, and with all persons. Nothing ever came to light but he was found
to have had a hand in it. He made it his sole business to look out for
something that he might be meddling with. His mania was to wish to be
concerned in every thing...! Always in every body’s shoes." This the
Emperor would often repeat.

At the time of the conspiracy of Georges, when Moreau was arrested,
Fouché was no longer at the head of the Police, and he endeavoured to
make himself very much regretted. “What stupidity!” said he, “they have
arrested Moreau when he was returning to Paris from his country
residence, a circumstance which at least appeared like the confidence of
innocence. On the contrary, he should have been seized when he went to
Gros-Bois, for then he was evidently running away.”

The remark which he made, or which is attributed to him on the affair of
the Duke d’Enghien, is well known; “It is more than a crime, it is a
fault,” said he. Such traits as these paint the character of a man
better than whole volumes.

The Emperor knew Fouché well, and never became his dupe. He has been
much blamed for having employed him in 1815, when indeed Fouché basely
betrayed him. Napoleon was not ignorant of his disposition; but he also
knew that the danger depended more on the circumstances than on the
individual. “If I had been victorious,” said he, “Fouché would have been
faithful. He took great care, it is true, to hold himself in readiness
for whatever might happen. I ought to have conquered!”

The Emperor, however, was acquainted with his underhand dealings, and he
did not spare him. After Napoleon’s return in 1815, one of the first
bankers of Paris presented himself at the Elysée, to inform him that, a
few days previously, a person just arrived from Vienna had waited upon
him with letters of credit, and had made enquiries respecting the means
by which he could meet with Fouché. Whether from reflection or
presentiment, the banker conceived some doubts respecting this
individual, and accordingly came to communicate them in person to the
Emperor, who was astonished that Fouché had concealed the matter from
his knowledge. In the course of a few hours Réal found the person in
question, and immediately brought him to the Elysée, where he was shut
up in a small room by himself. The Emperor ordered him to be brought
into the garden. “Do you know me?” said he to the man. This
commencement, and the feelings which the Emperor’s presence inspired,
greatly startled the stranger. “I am acquainted with all your
proceedings,” continued Napoleon, in a tone of severity: “if you this
moment confess all you know, I may pardon you; if not, you will be taken
from this garden to be shot.”—"I will tell all," said the man. “I am
sent hither by M. de Metternich to the Duke of Otranto, to propose that
he will despatch a messenger to Bâle, who will there meet the messenger
sent by M. de Metternich from Vienna. These,” continued he, delivering
some papers, “are the marks of recognition which they are to
possess.”—"Have you executed your mission to Fouché?" enquired the
Emperor.—"Yes."—"Has he despatched his messenger?"—"I do not know." The
man was put under confinement, and within an hour a confidential person
(M. F——) was on the road to Bâle. He introduced himself to the Austrian
messenger, and even held four conferences with him.

Meanwhile Fouché, who was uneasy at the non-appearance of his Vienna
messenger, one day waited on the Emperor, and attempted with an air of
gaiety and cheerfulness to conceal his extreme embarrassment. “There
were several looking-glasses,” said the Emperor, “in the apartment, and
I was much amused in studying him by stealth; the expression of his
countenance was hideous; he did not know how to enter upon the subject
which interested him so deeply.”—"Sire," said he at length, "a
circumstance occurred to me four or five days ago, which I fear I was
wrong in not communicating to your Majesty.... But I have so much
business on my hands——I am surrounded with so many reports, so many
intrigues——. A man came to me from Vienna with most ridiculous
propositions,——and he is now no where to be found!"—"M. Fouché," said
the Emperor, “you may injure yourself, if you take me for a fool. I have
secured the man you speak of, and I have known the whole intrigue for
several days. Have you sent to Bâle?”—"No, Sire."—"That is fortunate for
you. If it be otherwise, and I obtain proofs of it, it may cost you your
life."

Subsequent events have proved that this would have been but justice. It
appears, however, that Fouché had not sent, and here the business ended.

               PAPERS FROM EUROPE.—POLITICAL REFLECTIONS.

13th.—The Emperor breakfasted in the garden, and sent for us all to
attend him. He resumed the reading of the papers which we had glanced at
in the morning, and then proceeded to expatiate on political affairs.
The following observations are those which most forcibly struck me.

“On the 13th Vendemiaire, the inhabitants of Paris were completely
disgusted with the Government,” said the Emperor; "but the whole of the
army, the great majority of the population of the departments, the lower
class of citizens, and the peasantry, remained attached to it. Thus the
Revolution triumphed over this grand attack of the counter-revolution,
though it was only four or five years since the new principles had been
promulgated. The most frightful and calamitous scenes had been
witnessed; and a happier future was anticipated.

"But now how altered is the case!... If the soldier in his barracks
seeks to while away the tedious hours in talking of battles, he cannot
speak of Fontenoy or Prague, which he did not witness; he must speak of
the victories of Marengo, Austerlitz, and Jena; of him who gained them;
in short, of me, whose fame fills every mouth, and lives in every heart.

"Such a situation is unexampled in history. On whichever side it is
viewed, nothing but misfortunes present themselves. What will be the
result of this?... Two classes of people, inhabitants of the same soil,
will become mortal, irreconcileable enemies, will be incessantly
quarrelling, and will, perhaps, finally exterminate each other.

“The same fury will soon spread through Europe. The whole Continent will
be composed of two hostile parties; it will be no longer divided by
nations and territories, but by party-colours and opinions. Who can
foresee the crisis, the duration, the details of so many troubles! The
event cannot be doubtful. The present enlightened age will not
retrograde in knowledge!... How unfortunate was my fall!... I had
imprisoned the winds; but bayonets have released them. I could have
proceeded tranquilly in the universal regeneration, which can henceforth
be effected only amidst storms! My object was to amalgamate; others,
perhaps, will extirpate!”

                        THE GOVERNOR’S ARRIVAL.

14th.—The rainy weather had returned; for two days it had been miserably
wet. Some vessels appeared in sight; and we learnt by signals that they
brought the new Governor, Sir Hudson Lowe.

The Emperor was silent and melancholy during dinner. He was not well,
and he retired very early.

              THE EMPEROR’S PROGRESS IN LEARNING ENGLISH.

15th.—About 12 o’clock this morning I received four letters from Europe,
which rendered me as happy as I could possibly be in this place.

I saw the Emperor at five o’clock in the garden. He had taken advantage
of an interval of fine weather; the rain had been pouring the whole day.
I communicated to him the contents of my letters. All our party had
received communications from Europe. They were delivered to us open, and
they contained no news; but they proved that our friends still
remembered us, and in our situation such an assurance was peculiarly
gratifying.

During dinner, the Emperor described to us the contents of some French
papers which he had by him, and which, he said, gave an account of the
shipwreck of La Perouse, his different adventures; his death, and his
journal. The narrative consisted of the most curious, striking, and
romantic details, and interested us exceedingly. The Emperor observed
how highly our curiosity was excited, and then burst into a fit of
laughter. This story was nothing but an impromptu of his own, which he
said he had invented merely to show us the progress he had made in
English.

                THE GOVERNOR’S FIRST VISIT.—DECLARATION
                           REQUIRED FROM US.

16th.—The new Governor arrived at Longwood about ten o’clock,
notwithstanding the rain which still continued. He was accompanied by
the Admiral, who was to introduce him, and who had, no doubt, told him
that this was the most suitable hour for his visit. The Emperor did not
receive him; he was indisposed, and even had he been well, he would not
have seen him. The Governor, in this abrupt visit, neglected the usual
forms of decorum. It was easy to perceive that this was a trick of the
Admiral’s. The Governor, who probably had no intention to render himself
at all disagreeable, appeared very much disconcerted. We laughed in our
sleeves. As for the Admiral, he was quite triumphant.

The Governor, after long hesitation and very evident marks of
ill-humour, took his leave rather abruptly. We doubted not that this
visit had been planned by the Admiral, with the view of prepossessing us
against each other at the very outset. But whether the Governor himself
had any concern in it, or entertained any suspicion of its design, is a
question which time will decide.

About half-past five, the Emperor sent for me to attend him in the
garden. He was alone. He told me that a circumstance had arisen which
regarded us all individually. It had been determined to require a
declaration from each of us, stating whether we chose rather to unite
our fate with that of the Emperor, or to be removed from St. Helena and
set at liberty.

We could not guess the motive of this determination. Was it adopted by
the English Ministry for the sake of procuring regular documents? But at
the time of our departure from Plymouth, this preliminary condition was
perfectly understood. Was it hoped by this means to separate the Emperor
more completely from the world? But could it ever be supposed that we
would forsake him?

He asked what would be my determination on this point. I replied that it
could not be for a moment doubtful; that if I ever felt a pang, it must
have been at the moment of my first determination; that from that
instant my fate had been irrevocably fixed. I had at first obeyed only
the dictates of glory and honour; but in every succeeding day I had
indulged my natural affection and feelings. The Emperor’s voice assumed
a milder tone; and this was the mode in which he expressed his thanks. I
knew his heart, and the full extent of his gratitude.

I added that there was but little merit in my resolution. No change
could take place in our situations. The day after having signed the
document, we should be the same as we had been the day before. Our fate
depended not on human combinations, but on the course of events. It
would be very unwise to add to our troubles by calculations beyond the
reach of human foresight. It is our duty calmly to resign ourselves to
the mysterious decrees of Fate; and, in the depth of our misfortune, to
comfort ourselves with the reflection that our minds are free from
self-reproach. This is a consolation which it is beyond the power of man
to enfeeble or to destroy.

CHARACTERISTIC CONVERSATION.—THE EMPEROR’S RETURN FROM ELBA FORESEEN AT
  THE TIME OF HIS DEPARTURE FROM FONTAINEBLEAU.—THE GOVERNOR’S
  INTRODUCTION.—MORTIFICATION EXPERIENCED BY THE ADMIRAL.—OUR CAUSES OF
  COMPLAINT AGAINST HIM.—DESCRIPTION OF SIR HUDSON LOWE.

17th.—The Emperor sent for me at nine o’clock. He read to me an article
in the Portsmouth Courier, which gave a very long and faithful
description of his residence at Briars.

He sent for me again in the middle of the day to converse with him. One
part of the conversation affords so valuable a development of Napoleon’s
character that I cannot refrain from noting down some passages of it.

There occasionally arose among us transient misunderstandings and
disputes, which vexed and annoyed the Emperor. He adverted to this
topic. He analysed our situation with his usual train of reasoning. He
calculated the miseries and horrors of our exile, and pointed out the
best mode of alleviating them. He said that we ought to make mutual
sacrifices, and overlook many grievances; that man can only enjoy life
by controlling the character given to him by nature, or by creating to
himself a new one by education, and learning to modify it according to
the obstacles which he may encounter.

“You should endeavour to form but one family,” said he. “You have
followed me only with the view of assuaging my sorrow. Ought not this
feeling to subdue every other consideration? If sympathy alone is not
sufficiently powerful, let reason be your guide. You should learn to
calculate your sorrows, your sacrifices, and your enjoyments, in order
to arrive at a result, just as we make additions or subtractions in
every kind of calculation. All the circumstances of our lives should be
submitted to this rule.... We must learn to conquer ill temper. It is
natural enough that little misunderstandings should arise among you; but
they should be followed by explanation, and not succeeded by ill-humour;
the former will produce a result, the latter will only render the affair
more complicated. Reason and logical inference should, in this world, be
our constant guides.” He then proceeded to show how he had sometimes
acted up to these principles, and sometimes departed from them. He added
that we ought to learn to forgive, and to avoid that hostility and
acrimony which must be offensive to our neighbours and prejudicial to
our own happiness; that we ought to make allowance for human frailties,
and humour, rather than oppose, them.

“What would have become of me,” said he, "had I not followed these
maxims? It has often been said that I have been too good-natured, and
not sufficiently cautious; but it would have been much worse for me had
my disposition been the reverse of what it is. I have been twice
betrayed, it is true; and I may be betrayed a third time. But it was my
knowledge of human character, and the spirit of reasonable indulgence
which I had adopted, that enabled me to govern France; and which still
perhaps render me the fittest person to rule that nation, under existing
circumstances. On my departure from Fontainebleau, did I not say to all
who requested me to point out the line of conduct they should pursue,
‘Go, and serve the King!’ I wished to grant them lawful authority for
doing what many would not have hesitated to do of their own accord. I
would not allow the fidelity of some to be the cause of their ruin; and
finally, above all, I did not wish to have any one to censure on my
return."

I here ventured, contrary to my constant custom, to call the Emperor, in
some measure, to account. “How, Sire,” I exclaimed, “had your Majesty
any idea of returning when you left Fontainbleau?”—"Yes, certainly, and
by the simplest reasoning. If the Bourbons, said I, intend to commence a
fifth dynasty, I have nothing more to do here; I have acted my part.
But, if they should obstinately attempt to re-continue the third, I
shall soon appear again. It may be said that the Bourbons then had my
fame and conduct at their own disposal. It was in their power still to
represent me in the eyes of the common mass of mankind as an upstart, a
tyrant, a fire-brand, and a scourge. How much good sense and calm
reflection would have been necessary to appreciate my real character,
and render me justice!... But the men by whom the Bourbons were
surrounded, and the erroneous line of conduct they pursued, rendered my
presence desirable; they restored my popularity and decreed my return. I
should otherwise have ended my days on the Island of Elba, and this
would doubtless have proved most to the interest of all parties. I
returned to discharge a great debt, and not for the sake of resuming
possession of a throne. Perhaps few will comprehend the motive by which
I was actuated; no matter. I took upon myself a heavy charge, but it was
a duty I owed to the French people. Their complaints reached me; and how
could I turn a deaf ear to them?

"Upon the whole, my situation in the Island of Elba was sufficiently
enviable and agreeable. I should soon have created to myself a new kind
of sovereignty. All that was most distinguished in Europe began to pass
in review before me. I should have presented a spectacle unknown in
history: that of a monarch who had descended from his throne, beholding
the civilized world thronging to file off before him.

“It may indeed be objected that the Allies would have removed me from my
Island; and I admit that this circumstance hastened my return. But had
France been wisely governed, had the French people been content my
influence would have ended; I should henceforth have belonged only to
history, and the cabinet of Vienna would have entertained no idea of
deposing me. It was the agitation created and maintained in France that
first gave rise to the thought of my removal.”

Here the Grand Marshal entered the Emperor’s apartment. He came to
announce the arrival of the Governor, who was escorted by the Admiral,
and followed by the whole of his staff.

After some further conversation, Bertrand was left alone with the
Emperor, and I proceeded to the antechamber; here all the suite was
assembled. We endeavoured to exchange a few words with each other; but
we were rather bent on observing than conversing.

In about half an hour, the Emperor entered the drawing-room. The
valet-de-chambre on duty, who was stationed at the door within the
apartment, then summoned the Governor, and he was introduced. The
Admiral was following close behind him. The valet who had heard only the
Governor’s name mentioned, suddenly closed the door without admitting
the Admiral, who was shut out in spite of his remonstrance; and he
withdrew quite disconcerted into the recess of one of the windows. The
valet de chambre who was the cause of this affront, was Noverraz, a
Swiss, a good and faithful servant, of whom the Emperor frequently said
that his whole understanding was absorbed in his attachment to his
master.

We were astonished at this unexpected occurrence; and we at first
concluded that Noverraz had acted in obedience to the Emperor’s wishes.
Though we had ample reason to complain of the Admiral, yet we did all in
our power to relieve him from his embarrassment; his awkward situation
distressed us. Meanwhile the Governor’s staff was summoned and
introduced; and this circumstance served only to increase the Admiral’s
confusion. In about a quarter of an hour the Emperor took leave of his
visitors. The Governor came out of the drawing-room, and the Admiral
eagerly advanced to meet him. They said a few words to each other with
some degree of warmth, then took leave of us and departed.

We joined the Emperor in the garden, and our conversation turned on the
Admiral’s discomfiture. The Emperor knew nothing of the matter. The
whole circumstance was solely the effect of chance. The Emperor declared
himself delighted with the joke. He burst into a fit of laughter, rubbed
his hands, and exhibited the joy of a child, of a school-boy, who had
successfully played off a trick on his master. “Ah! my good Noverraz,”
said he, “you have done a clever thing for once in your life. He had
heard me say that I would not see the Admiral again, and he thought he
was bound to shut the door in his face. But this honest Swiss may
perhaps carry the joke too far; if I were unfortunately to say we must
get rid of the Governor, he would be for assassinating him before my
eyes. After all,” said the Emperor, assuming a more serious tone, "it
was entirely the Governor’s fault. He should have requested that the
Admiral might be admitted, particularly as he had informed me that he
could be presented only by him. Why, again, did he not request the
Admiral’s admission when he presented his officers to me? He is solely
to blame. But," continued he, “the Admiral has lost nothing by the
mistake. I should without hesitation have apostrophized him in the
presence of his countrymen. I should have told him that by the sentiment
attached to the honourable uniform which we had both worn for forty
years, I accused him of having, in the eyes of the world, degraded his
nation and his Sovereign by wantonly and stupidly failing in respect to
one of the oldest soldiers in Europe. I should have reproached him with
landing me at St. Helena just as he would have landed a convict at
Botany-Bay. I should have assured him that a man of true honour would
shew me more respect on my rock than if I were still on my throne and
surrounded by my armies.” The force and spirit of these remarks put a
period to our gaiety, and closed the conversation.

As I have thus alluded to the Admiral, and as he is now about to quit
us, I will once for all sum up the insults with which we have to
reproach him, with as much impartiality as our situation and the state
of our feelings will admit of.

We cannot pardon the affected familiarity with which he treated us,
though our conduct afforded but little encouragement to it. Still less
can we forgive him for having endeavoured to extend this familiarity to
the Emperor. We can never forget the haughty and self-complacent air
with which he addressed Napoleon by the title of _General_. The Emperor,
it is true, has immortalized that title; but the tone and the intention
with which it was applied were sufficiently insulting.

On our arrival at St. Helena, he lodged the Emperor in a little room, a
few feet square, where he kept him for two months, though other
residences could have been procured, and there was one which the Admiral
had himself fixed upon. He indirectly prohibited the Emperor from riding
on horseback, even in the grounds surrounding the Briars; and the
individuals of the Emperor’s suite were loaded with embarrassments and
humiliations, when they came to pay their daily visits to him in his
little cell.

On our removal to Longwood, he stationed sentinels under the very
windows of the Emperor; and then, by an evasion, which savoured of the
bitterest irony, he alleged that this step had been taken only with a
view to the _General’s_ own advantage and protection. He suffered no one
to come near us without a note from him, and, having thus placed us in
close confinement, he declared that these arrangements had been made
solely to secure the Emperor against importunity, and that he (the
Admiral) was merely acting the part of _Grand Marshal_. He gave a ball,
and sent a written invitation to _General Buonaparte_, in the same
manner as he did to every individual in the suite. He replied with the
most unbecoming jeers to the notes of the Grand Marshal, who used the
title of _Emperor_, saying that he knew no _Emperor_ at the Island of
St. Helena, nor any such Sovereign in Europe, or elsewhere, who was not
in his own dominions. He refused to forward a letter from the Emperor to
the Prince Regent, unless it were delivered to him open, or he were
permitted to read it. He even stifled the sentiments and expressions of
respect which other individuals manifested for Napoleon. We were assured
that he had put persons in inferior situations under arrest, merely for
having used the title of Emperor or other similar expressions; which,
however, were frequently employed in the 53rd regiment, doubtless, as
the Emperor observed, through an irresistible sentiment with which these
brave men were inspired.

The Admiral, from his own personal caprice, had limited the extent of
our rides and walks. On this subject he had even broken his word to the
Emperor. At a moment when he appeared somewhat inclined to make
concessions, he had assured Napoleon that he was free to ride in all
parts of the Island, without being annoyed even by the sight of the
English officer appointed to guard him. But a few days after this, just
as Napoleon was on the point of mounting his horse to ride out to
breakfast in a shady spot at some distance from our residence, he found
himself under the necessity of renouncing this little enjoyment. The
officer declared that he must henceforth form one of the party and ride
close to him. From that moment the Emperor refused to see the Admiral.
The latter had moreover neglected the most ordinary forms of decorum,
always fixing upon unsuitable hours for his own visits, and directing
strangers who arrived at the Island to select the same unseasonable
periods for visiting the Emperor. This was no doubt done with a view of
preventing people from gaining access to Napoleon, who constantly
refused to be seen on these occasions. It has already been stated that
the Admiral acted thus when the Governor paid his first visit to
Longwood; and the satisfaction he evinced at the Governor’s ill
reception but too plainly betrayed his design.

However, if we were required to pronounce an impartial opinion on him,
making allowance for the irritability of our own feelings and the
delicacy of his situation, we should not hesitate to declare that our
grievances rested in forms rather than facts. We should say, with the
Emperor, who had after all a natural predilection for him, that Admiral
Cockburn is far from being an ill-disposed man, that he is even
susceptible of generous and delicate sentiment; but that he is
capricious, irascible, vain, and overbearing: that he is a man who is
accustomed to authority, and who exercises it ungraciously; frequently
substituting energy for dignity. To express in a few words the nature of
our relations with respect to him, we should say, that, as a jailor, he
was mild, humane, and generous, and that we have reason to be grateful
to him; but that, as a host, he was generally unpolite, often something
worse, and that in this character we have cause to be displeased with
him.

About two or three o’clock, the Emperor took his usual airing. During
our walk in the garden and our ride in the calash, he said a good deal
about the events of the morning; and the conversation on this subject
was resumed after dinner. Some one jokingly observed that the two first
days of the Governor’s arrival had been like days of battle, and were
calculated to make us appear very untractable, though we were naturally
most patient and accommodating. At these last words, the Emperor smiled
and pinched the ear of the individual who made the remark.

The conversation then turned on Sir Hudson Lowe. He was described as
being a man about forty-five years of age; of the ordinary height, and
of slender make, with red hair, a ruddy complexion, and freckled. His
eyes were said to have an oblique kind of expression; glancing askance,
seldom fixed full in a person’s face; surmounted by fair, bushy, and
very prominent eyebrows. “He is hideous,” said the Emperor, "he has a
most villainous countenance. But we must not decide too hastily; the
man’s disposition may perhaps make amends for the unfavorable impression
which his face produces; this is not impossible."

      CONVENTION OF THE SOVEREIGNS RESPECTING NAPOLEON.—REMARKABLE
                             OBSERVATIONS.

18th. The weather had been horrible for some days past, but it cleared
up a little to-day. The Emperor went out early to take his walk in the
garden; about 4 o’clock he got into the calash and took rather a longer
airing than usual. Before dinner the Emperor desired me to translate to
him the Convention of the Allied Sovereigns relative to his captivity.
It was as follows:—

CONVENTION BETWEEN GREAT BRITAIN, AUSTRIA, PRUSSIA, AND RUSSIA.—_Signed
  at Paris, August 20th, 1815._

"Napoleon Bonaparte being in the power of the Allied Sovereigns, their
Majesties the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,
the Emperor of Austria, the Emperor of Russia, and the King of Prussia,
have agreed, by virtue of the stipulations of the treaty of the 25th of
March, 1815, on the measures best calculated to preclude the possibility
of his making any attempt to disturb the peace of Europe.

"Art. I.—Napoleon Bonaparte is considered by the Powers who signed the
treaty of the 20th of March last, as their prisoner.

"Art. II.—His safeguard is specially intrusted to the British
Government.

"The choice of the place and the measures which may best ensure the
object of the present stipulation, are reserved to his Britannic
Majesty.

"Art. III.—The imperial courts of Austria and Russia and the Royal court
of Prussia shall appoint Commissioners to reside in the place which his
Britannic Majesty’s Government shall assign as the residence of Napoleon
Bonaparte, and who, without being responsible for his security, shall
assure themselves of his presence.

"Art. IV.—His most Christian Majesty is invited in the name of the four
Courts above mentioned, also to send a French commissioner to the place
of Napoleon Bonaparte’s detention.

"Art. V. —His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland pledges himself to fulfil the engagements assigned to him by
the present convention.

"Art. VI.—The present convention shall be ratified, and the ratification
shall be exchanged in the space of a fortnight, or sooner if possible.

"In virtue of which the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the
present convention, and have affixed their seals thereto.

“Given at Paris on the 20th of August, in the year of our Lord 1815.”

When I had finished translating this document, the Emperor asked me what
I thought of it.

“Sire,” I replied, "in the situation in which we are placed, I would
rather depend on the interests of a single one, than on the complicated
decision of four. England has evidently dictated this treaty. You see
how carefully she stipulates that she alone shall answer for and dispose
of the prisoner. She has been labouring to provide herself with the
lever of Archimedes, and therefore it is not probable that she w¡ll
entertain any idea of breaking it."

The Emperor, without explaining his ideas on this subject, adverted to
the different chances which might bring about his liberation from St.
Helena, and he made the following remarkable observations: “If the
Sovereigns of Europe act wisely, and should succeed in completely
restoring order, we shall not be worth the money and the trouble which
it must cost to keep us here, and they will get rid of us. But our
captivity may still be prolonged for some years, perhaps three, four, or
five. Otherwise, setting aside the fortuitous events which are beyond
the reach of human foresight, I calculate only on two uncertain chances
of our liberation: first, that the Sovereigns may stand in need of me to
assist in putting down rebellion among their subjects; and secondly, the
people of Europe may require my aid in the contest that may arise
between them and their monarchs. I am the natural arbiter and mediator
in the immense conflict between the present and the past. I have always
aspired to be the supreme judge in this cause. My administration at home
and my diplomacy abroad all tended to this great end. The issue might
have been brought about more easily and promptly; but fate ordained
otherwise. Finally, there is a last chance, which perhaps is the most
probable of all; I may be wanted to check the power of the Russians;
for, in less than ten years, all Europe may perhaps be overrun with
Cossacks, or subject to republican government. Such however are the
statesmen who brought about my overthrow.” Then, reverting to the
decision of the Sovereigns respecting him, he observed that it was
difficult to account for the style of the document, and the malignant
spirit which pervaded it.

“The Emperor Francis,” said he, “is a pious sovereign, and I am his
son-in-law.—As for Alexander, we once loved each other. With regard to
the King of Prussia, I doubtless did him much harm, but I might have
done him much more; and after all, might he not have found real glory
and self-satisfaction in distinguishing himself by generosity? As to
England, it is to the animosity of her Ministers that I am indebted for
all. But it remained for the Prince Regent to observe and interfere, or
to be branded as a fool, and a protector of vulgar malignity.—One thing
however is certain, namely: that the Allied Sovereigns have compromised,
degraded, and lost themselves, by their treatment of me.”

                THE DECLARATION REQUIRED FROM US BY THE
                               GOVERNOR.

19th.—This morning the Grand Marshal and Madame Bertrand came into the
garden, in consequence of the Emperor having expressed an intention of
breakfasting there; but as he had passed a very restless night, and had
had no sleep, he breakfasted in his chamber.

The Governor gave us official notice that we must each send him a
declaration, expressing our voluntary determination to remain at
Longwood, and to submit to all the restrictions which Napoleon’s
captivity might require. Mine was as follows:—

_Declaration._—"I, the undersigned, repeat the declaration which I made
when in Plymouth-roads; namely, that I wish to devote myself to the fate
of the Emperor Napoleon, to accompany him, to follow him, and to
alleviate, as far as lies in my power, the unjust treatment he
experiences, through the most unheard-of violation of the law of
nations, of which I am the more particularly sensible as it was I who
conveyed to him the offer and assurance of Captain Maitland of the
Bellerophon, purporting that he had orders to receive the Emperor and
his suite under the protection of the British flag, if agreeable to him,
and to convey him to England.

"The Emperor Napoleon’s letter to the Prince Regent, which is known to
all England, and which I had previously communicated to Captain
Maitland, without his having made the slightest observation on it,
explains to the world much better than any thing I can say how frankly
the Emperor met this offer of hospitality, and, consequently, how much
he has been the dupe of his sincerity and confidence.

"Notwithstanding the experience I have had of the horrors of a residence
on the Island of St. Helena, which is so prejudicial to the Emperor’s
health, and to that of every European, and though, during the six months
which we have passed on the island, I have been subjected to every
species of privation, which I myself daily multiply, in order to avoid,
as much as possible, the violation of that respect which my rank and
habits demand, yet, constant to my first sentiments, and resolved that
for the future no fear of misfortune, or hope of advantage, shall
separate me from the Emperor Napoleon, I repeat my desire to remain with
him, and to submit to whatever restrictions may be arbitrarily imposed
on him."

FAREWELL VISIT OF THE LATE GOVERNOR.—INTERESTING CONVERSATION.—REMARK OF
  AN OLD ENGLISH SOLDIER.

20th.—Colonel Wilks, being on the eve of his departure for Europe,
called with his daughter to take leave of the Emperor. The young lady
was presented by Madame Bertrand. I have already mentioned that Colonel
Wilks had formerly been Governor of the Colony, for the East India
Company; he was succeeded by the Admiral, in the King’s name, when, in
consequence of our removal to St. Helena, the island was transferred
from the possession of the Company to that of the Government.

The Emperor was in a remarkably cheerful humour. He conversed for some
time with the ladies, and then took Colonel Wilks aside to the recess of
one of the windows, whither I followed to serve as interpreter.

Col. Wilks, as I have probably mentioned before, was for a long time the
diplomatic agent of the Company in the Indian Peninsula; he has written
a history of that country. He is a man of extensive information, and
possesses great knowledge of chemistry. Thus he was at once a soldier,
an author, a diplomatist, and a chemist. The Emperor put questions to
him relative to all these subjects, and treated them himself with great
fluency and spirit. The conversation was lively and varied; and it was
maintained for upwards of two hours. The following are the principal
particulars which I noted down. I shall probably in some measure repeat
what I have said before, for the Emperor and Colonel Wilks had, some
months ago, a long conversation on precisely the same topics; but that
is of no importance; these subjects are so interesting that I would
rather incur the risk of repeating than of losing any thing connected
with them.

The Emperor began by speaking of the English army, its organization, and
particularly its system of promotion. He compared it with the French
army, and repeated what I have formerly stated with regard to the
excellent composition of our military force, the advantage of the
Conscription, and the bravery of our troops. Then, turning to the
subject of politics, he said, “You lost America by liberation: you will
lose India by invasion. The first loss was perfectly natural; as
children advance in years, they break the parental bonds. But, for the
Hindoos, they are not advancing at all. They still remain children. The
catastrophe, therefore, can only proceed from without. You are not aware
of all the dangers with which you were threatened by my arms or my
negotiations. As for my Continental system, you perhaps laughed at it?”
“Sire,” replied the Colonel, “we affected to do so, but all men of
judgment felt the full force of it.”—"Well," continued the Emperor, "I
stood alone in my opinion on the Continent; and I was forced for the
moment to employ violence every where. At length my plan began to be
understood. The tree already bears its fruit. I made the beginning; time
will do the rest.... Had I maintained my power, I would have changed the
course of trade, and the direction of industry. I had naturalized sugar
and indigo in France, and I should have naturalized cotton, and many
other articles of foreign produce. I should have knocked up the
Colonies, if we had continued to be denied a share of them.

“With us the impulse was most powerful. National prosperity and science
advanced beyond measure. Yet your Ministers proclaimed through all
Europe that the French were overwhelmed with misery, and were
retrograding to a state of barbarism. Thus the view of our internal
prosperity strangely surprised the vulgar mass, and even disconcerted
the more thinking portion of the European public. The strides of
knowledge in France were gigantic. The ideas of the French people were
every where properly directed and extended. We took pains to render
science popular. I was informed that your countrymen were distinguished
for their knowledge of chemistry; and yet I will not decide on which
side of the water the most able chemist will be found.”—"In France,"
said the Colonel immediately.

“It is of little importance,” continued the Emperor; “but I maintain
that in the mass of the French people there is ten, and perhaps a
hundred, times more chemical knowledge than in England; because the
manufacturing classes now employ that science in their daily labour.
This was one of the characteristics of my school. Had I been allowed
sufficient time, there would soon have been no such thing as trades in
France; they would all have been converted into arts.”

The Emperor concluded with these remarkable observations: "England and
France held in their hands the fate of the world; and particularly that
of European civilization. What injury have we not done to each
other!——What good might we not have done! Under Pitt’s system, we
desolated the world; and what has been the result? You imposed on France
a tax of fifteen hundred millions of francs, and raised it by means of
Cossacks. I laid a tax of seven thousand millions on you, and made you
raise it with your own hands, by your Parliament. Even now, after the
victory you have obtained, who can tell whether you may not sooner or
later sink under the weight of such a burden?——With Fox’s system, we
should have understood each other; we should have accomplished and
preserved the emancipation of nations, the dominion of principles.
Europe would have presented but a single fleet and a single army. We
might have ruled the world. We might every where have established peace
and prosperity, either by dint of force or persuasion. Yes, I repeat it,
what mischief have we not done! What good might we not have effected!"

Never was Napoleon in a more talkative humour. He laughed more than once
at the endeavours I made to keep up with the volubility with which he
uttered his observations. As for the Colonel, he took his leave, amazed
and confounded by what he had heard.

When he was gone, the Emperor continued to converse for a long time in
the drawing-room. He afterwards went into the garden, in spite of the
bad weather, and sent for us all to join him. He was desirous of reading
the declarations which we had made; they became the subject of
conversation.

Four ships arrived here to-day from Europe. They had on board the 66th
regiment, and had left England before the Phaëton, which brought the new
Governor, Sir Hudson Lowe.

After dinner, the Emperor good-humouredly related the remark made by an
old soldier of the 53rd, who, having seen him yesterday for the first
time, went back to his comrades and said,—"What lies they told me about
Napoleon’s age; he is not old at all; the fellow is still young enough
for at least sixty campaigns." We thought this expression savoured very
much of the Frenchman, and we laid claim to it as having proceeded from
one of our grenadiers. We then related to him a number of _bons-mots_
made by our soldiers during his absence and on his return, with which he
was much entertained. But what particularly excited his risibility was
the answer made by a grenadier at Lyons. A grand review was held there,
just after the Emperor had landed on his return from Elba. The
Commanding Officer remarked to his soldiers that they were well clothed
and well fed, that their pay might be seen upon their persons:—"Yes,
certainly," replied the grenadier to whom he addressed himself.—"Well!"
continued the officer, with a confident air, “it was not so under
Bonaparte. Your pay was in arrear, he was in your debt?”—"And what did
that signify," said the grenadier smartly, “if we chose to give him
credit?”

THE EMPEROR’S MESSAGE TO THE PRINCE REGENT.—CHARACTERISTIC
  REMARKS.—PORTFOLIO LOST AT WATERLOO.—ON AMBASSADORS.—M. DE
  NARBONNE.—NAPOLEON ON THE POINT OF BEING TAKEN PRISONER IN GERMANY
  AFTER THE BATTLE OF MOSCOW.—COST OF THE EMPEROR’S TOILET.—EXPENSE OF A
  FAMILY ESTABLISHMENT IN THE DIFFERENT CAPITALS OF EUROPE.—THE
  FURNISHING OF NAPOLEON’S HOUSE IN THE RUE DE LA VICTOIRE.—THE FITTING
  UP OF THE IMPERIAL PALACES.—THE EMPEROR’S METHOD OF EXAMINING HIS
  ACCOUNTS.

21st.—The Emperor sent for me to attend him in the garden, about four
o’clock, to act as interpreter. Captain Hamilton, the Commander of the
Havannah frigate, was to sail next day for Europe, and, with his
officers, had come to take leave of the Emperor. Captain Hamilton spoke
French. When I joined the party in the garden, the Emperor was
expressing himself with warmth.

“They wish to know what I desire?” said he; “I demand my liberty or
death. Report these words to your Prince Regent. I no longer ask to hear
from my son, since they have had the barbarity to leave my first request
unanswered.... I was not your prisoner. Savages would have had more
respect for my situation. Your Ministers have basely violated in my
person the sacred rights of hospitality; they have for ever dishonoured
England!”

Captain Hamilton having ventured to observe that Napoleon was not the
prisoner of England alone, but of all the Allied Powers, the Emperor
warmly resumed; “I did not deliver myself up to Russia, there I should
doubtless have been well received; I did not surrender myself to
Austria, there I should have been equally well treated; but I delivered
myself up, of my own free will and choice, to England, because I had
confidence in her laws and her public morals. I have been cruelly
deceived! But Heaven will avenge my wrongs; and, sooner or later you
will meet the punishment of a deed for which mankind already reproaches
you!——Repeat all this to the Prince Regent, sir.” He accompanied these
last words with a motion of his hand, and dismissed the Captain.

We walked about for a few minutes, and on the return of the Grand
Marshal, who had accompanied Captain Hamilton a short distance, we
thought that it would be proper to leave him alone with the Emperor; but
I had scarcely entered my room when he sent for me. He was alone, in his
own apartment; he asked me whether I had not had enough of retirement
during the day. I told him that a feeling of respect and discretion had
alone induced me to leave him. To this he answered that there was no
occasion for it, as nothing had passed that he wished to make a secret
of. “Besides,” added he, “a certain degree of freedom and ease is not
without its charm.” These words, which fell carelessly from Napoleon’s
lips, may better serve to show his character than hundreds of pages.

We then perused an English publication, containing the official
documents found in his portfolio, which was taken at Waterloo. The
Emperor was astonished himself at the number of orders which he had
issued almost at the same moment, and the countless details which he had
directed in every quarter of the empire. “This publication,” said he,
“can do me no harm, after all. It will at least satisfy every one that
its contents are not the production of a sluggard. They will compare me
with the legitimate Sovereigns, and I shall not suffer by the
comparison.”

After dinner, the Emperor conversed on several unconnected subjects. In
speaking of his Ambassadors, he said that he considered M. de Narbonne
as the only one who had fully deserved that title, and had really
fulfilled the duties of his office. “And that,” said he, “by the
peculiar advantages, not only of his talents, but of his old-fashioned
morals, his manners, and his name. When an Ambassador has merely to
prescribe, any one may fill the post; one person is just as good as
another; perhaps an aide-de-camp is the best man that can be chosen. But
when it is necessary to negotiate, the affair is widely different. In
that case it is indispensable to present to the old aristocracy of the
Courts of Europe, only the elements of that aristocracy, which, in fact,
constitutes a sort of free-masonry. If an Otto or an Andreossi were to
enter the saloons of Vienna, there would be a stop to the interchange of
opinion; habitual manners would cease. They would be regarded as
intruders and profaners, and the mysteries of diplomacy would be
suspended. But how different would it be with a Narbonne, possessing the
advantages of affinity, sympathy, and identity! A lady of the old
nobility would perhaps resign her person to a plebeian, though she would
not discover to him the secrets of the aristocracy.”

The Emperor was much attached to M. de Narbonne, and regretted him
deeply. He had made him his aide-de-camp, he observed, only because
Maria Louisa, through the intrigues of the persons composing her suite,
had refused to let him be appointed her gentleman of honour; a post for
which he was perfectly adapted. “Until the period of his embassy,”
continued the Emperor, “we had been duped by Austria. In less than a
fortnight, M. de Narbonne penetrated all the secrets of the cabinet of
Vienna, and M. de Metternich was deeply mortified at the appointment.
However, by a singular fatality, perhaps, even the success of M. de
Narbonne thwarted my views. I found that his talent was no less fatal
than useful. Austria, supposing that her designs were guessed, threw
aside the mask, and took precipitate steps. Had less penetration been
shewn on our part, she would have acted with greater reserve and
deliberation. She would have prolonged her natural indecision, and in
the interim other chances might have risen up.”

Some one present having alluded to the embassies of Dresden and Berlin,
and being apparently inclined to attach blame to our diplomatic agents
in those courts, at the period of the return from Moscow, the Emperor
replied that, at that period, the fault was not to be attributed to
persons, but to things; that with a single glance any one might have
foreseen what would happen; and that, for his part, he had not been
deceived for a moment. He added that if he had not in person conducted
the army back to Wilna, and into Germany, it was through the fear of not
being able himself to reach France. He wished, he said, to obviate this
imminent danger by the boldness of his movements in crossing Germany
rapidly and alone. He was, however, on the point of being taken in
Silesia: “but luckily,” said he, "the Prussians were deliberating at the
moment when they ought to have been acting. Their conduct in this
respect was like that which the Saxons observed towards Charles XII.,
who said, when he quitted Dresden on a similar occasion;—‘You will see
that they will hold a consultation to-morrow upon the expediency of
having detained me to-day.’”

Before dinner the Emperor called me into his closet to go over some
English exercises with him. He told me that he had just been calculating
the expenses of his toilet, and that it cost him about four napoleons
per month. We laughed at the immensity of the budget. He talked of
ordering some clothes, shoes, boots, &c. from the tradesmen in Europe
who had his measures. I thought that this would be attended with serious
inconvenience, and, after some consideration, we were convinced that it
would never be permitted.

“It is, however,” observed the Emperor, “extremely vexatious to be thus
deprived of money; and I wish to come to some settlement on this point.
As soon as the bill, which is to determine our situation here, shall be
notified to me, I intend to make arrangements for receiving an annual
loan of seven or eight millions of napoleons from Eugene. He cannot
refuse me. He has received from me perhaps upwards of forty-millions;
and it would be an insult to his sentiments to doubt his readiness to
serve me. Besides, we have long accounts to settle together. I am sure,
if I had appointed a committee of my Councillors of State to draw up a
report on this subject, they would have presented me with a balance of
at least ten or twelve millions against Eugene.”

At dinner the Emperor asked us some questions respecting the sum
necessary to enable a bachelor to live in a European capital, or for the
support of a plain family establishment, or the maintenance of a family
in a style of elegance. He is fond of these questions and calculations;
he treats them with great shrewdness, and enters into the most curious
details.

We each presented our budgets, and agreed that a residence in Paris
would cost 15,000, 40,000, and 100,000 francs. The Emperor dwelt much on
the prices of various articles, and even on the prices of the same
articles, as they are charged to different persons, and under different
circumstances.

“When I was about to leave the army of Italy,” said he, “to return to
Paris, Madame Bonaparte wrote to inform me that she had furnished, in
the best possible style, a small house that we had in the _Rue de la
Victoire_. The house was not worth more than 40,000 francs. What was my
surprise and vexation to find that the drawing-room furniture, which,
after all, appeared to me nothing out of the way, was charged at the
enormous rate of between 120 and 130,000 francs. In vain did I
remonstrate; I was obliged to pay the amount. The upholsterer showed me
the directions he had received, and which required that every article
should be the very best in its kind. Every thing had been made after new
designs, and the designs themselves had been invented expressly for the
fitting up of my house. Any judge of the case must have condemned me.”

The Emperor then adverted to the extravagant charges made for furnishing
the imperial Palaces, and the vast saving which he had made on this
point. He told us the price of the throne, the imperial ornaments, &c.
Nothing could be more curious than to hear him detail these charges,
together with his own plans of economy. How much I regret not having
noted them down at the time! The following particulars will serve to
show some of the methods which he adopted for ascertaining the
correctness of the accounts that were presented to him:—

On one occasion, when he returned to the Tuileries, which had been
magnificently fitted up during his absence, those about him were anxious
to direct his attention to all the new furniture and decorations. After
expressing his satisfaction at every thing he saw, he walked up to a
window overhung with a rich curtain, and, asking for a pair of scissars,
cut off a superb gold acorn which was suspended from the drapery, and
coolly putting it into his pocket, he continued his inspection to the
great astonishment of all present, who were unable to guess his motive.
Some days afterwards, at his levee, he drew the acorn from his pocket
and gave it to the person who superintended the furnishing of the
palace. “Here,” said he, “Heaven forbid that I should think you rob me;
but some one has doubtless robbed you. You have paid for this at the
rate of one-third above its value. They have dealt with you as though
you had been the steward of a great nobleman. You would have made a
better bargain if you had not been known.” The fact was that Napoleon,
having walked out one morning in disguise (as he was often in the habit
of doing), called at some of the shops in the Rue Saint Denis, where he
enquired the price of ornaments similar to that which he had cut from
the curtain, and enquired the value of various articles of furniture
like those provided for the palace, and thus, as he said, he arrived at
the result in its simplest form. Every one knew his habits in this
respect. These, he said, were his grand plans for ensuring domestic
economy, which, notwithstanding his extreme magnificence, was carried to
the utmost degree of precision and regularity.

In spite of his numerous occupations he himself revised all his
accounts; but he had his own method of doing this, and they were always
presented to him in their details. He would cast his eye on the first
article, sugar for example, and, finding some thousands of pounds set
down, he would take a pen, and say to the person who drew up the
accounts: “How many persons are there in my household?”—"Sire, so many:"
(and it was necessary to give the answer immediately.)—"And how many
pounds of sugar do you suppose they consume per day on an
average?"—"Sire, so many."—He immediately made his calculation, and,
having satisfied himself, he would give back the paper, saying, “Sir, I
have doubled your estimate of the daily consumption, and yet you are
enormously beyond the mark. Your account is erroneous. Make it out
again, and let me have greater correctness.” This reproof would be
sufficient to establish the strictest regularity. Thus he sometimes said
of his private, as of his public, administration, “I have introduced
such order, and employed so many checks, that I cannot be much imposed
on. If I am wronged at all, I leave the guilty person to settle the
matter with his own conscience. He will not sink under the weight of his
crime, for it cannot be very heavy.”

THE GOVERNOR’S VISIT TO MY APARTMENT.—CRITIQUE ON VOLTAIRE’S
  MAHOMET.—REMARKS ON THE MAHOMET OF HISTORY.—GRETRY.

22nd—25th. The weather has been very bad for several days past. The
Emperor discontinued his morning walks, and applied himself with greater
regularity to his different occupations. He dictated every morning on
the events of 1814.

Sir Hudson Lowe came to visit our establishment. He entered my apartment
and remained there for a quarter of an hour. He expressed his regret for
the inconveniences to which we were exposed; and observed that we were
lodged in bivouacs rather than in apartments. He was right; the pitched
paper which had been used for the rooms was already beginning to yield
to the effect of the hot climate; when the sun shone I was stifled; and
when it rained I was inundated. Sir Hudson Lowe said that he would give
directions for having these evils remedied as far as possible, and
politely added that he had brought with him about 1500 or 2000 French
volumes, which, as soon as they were arranged, he should feel great
pleasure in placing at our service.

Racine and Voltaire occupied us for these two or three evenings. Phedre
and Athalie, which were read to us by the Emperor, afforded us
delightful entertainment; for his observations and commentaries gave
twofold interest to what he read.

Mahomet was the subject of deep criticism. “Voltaire,” said the Emperor,
"in the character and conduct of his hero, has departed both from nature
and history. He has degraded Mahomet, by making him descend to the
lowest intrigues. He has represented a great man, who changed the face
of the world, acting like a scoundrel, worthy of the gallows. He has no
less absurdly travestied the character of Omar, which he has drawn like
that of a cut-throat in a melo-drama.

“Voltaire committed a fundamental error in attributing to intrigue that
which was solely the result of opinion. Those who have wrought great
changes in the world never succeeded by gaining over chiefs, but always
by exciting the multitude. The first is the resource of intrigue, and
produces only secondary results: the second is the resort of genius, and
transforms the face of the universe!”

The Emperor, adverting to the truth of history, expressed his disbelief
of all that was attributed to Mahomet. “He must doubtless have been like
all chiefs of sects,” said he. “The Koran, having been written thirty
years after his death, may have recorded many falsehoods. The Empire of
the Prophet, his doctrine and his mission, being established and
fulfilled, people might and must have spoken accordingly. Still it
remains to be explained how the mighty event which we are certain did
take place, namely, the conquest of the world, could have been effected
in the short space of fifty or sixty years. By whom was it brought
about? By the hordes of the desert, who, as we are informed, were few in
number, ignorant, unwarlike, undisciplined, and destitute of system. And
yet they opposed the civilized world, abounding in resources. Fanaticism
could not have accomplished this miracle, for fanaticism must have had
time to establish her dominion, and the career of Mahomet lasted only
thirteen years.”—The Emperor conceived that, independently of the
fortuitous events by which prodigies are sometimes brought about, there
must have been in this case some hidden circumstance which has not
reached our knowledge. He was of opinion, that Europe had doubtless sunk
beneath the results of some primary cause, of which we are
ignorant;—that the different races of people, who suddenly issued from
the deserts, had perhaps been engaged in long civil wars, in which men
of heroic character and great talent might have risen up, and
irresistible impulses have been created.

In all that relates to oriental affairs, Napoleon departed materially
from the common opinions which are derived from the books usually
regarded as authorities. He said that on this subject he entertained
ideas peculiar to himself, though perhaps they were not very well
defined; and that his expedition to Egypt had brought about this result
in his mind.

“But to return to Voltaire,” said he, “it is astonishing how ill his
dramas are adapted for reading.—When criticism and good taste are not
cheated by pomp of diction and scenic illusion, he immediately loses a
thousand per cent. It will scarcely be believed,” continued he, “that,
at the time of the Revolution, Voltaire had superseded Corneille and
Racine. The beauties of these two great dramatists lay dormant, until
the First Consul again brought them into notice.”

The Emperor spoke truly. It is very certain that when he brought us back
to civilization, he at the same time restored us to good taste. He
revived our national dramatic and lyric master-pieces—even those which
had been proscribed for political reasons. Thus Richard Cœur-de-Lion
was again brought upon the stage, though a tender interest had as it
were consecrated it to the Bourbons.

“Poor Gretry,” said the Emperor, “had long urged me to permit the
performance of the opera. It was rather a dangerous experiment, and a
violent uproar was predicted. The representation however went off
without any unpleasant circumstances, and I ordered it to be repeated
for a week or a fortnight in succession, until the public were
completely tired of it. The charm being broken, Richard continued to be
played like any ordinary piece, until the time when the Bourbons in
their turn prohibited it, because it excited an interest in my favour.”

This strange vicissitude has, it is said, since been renewed with regard
to the drama of Prince Edward the Pretender. The Emperor prohibited the
piece on account of the Bourbons, and the Bourbons have recently
proscribed it on account of the Emperor.

MY VISIT TO PLANTATION HOUSE.—SIR HUDSON LOWE’S INSINUATIONS.—HIS FIRST
  ILL-NATURED TRICK.—NAPOLEON’S PROCLAMATIONS.—HIS POLICY IN EGYPT.—HIS
  CONFESSION OF AN ILLEGAL ACT.

26th.—I went to pay my first visit to Plantation-House. I thought Lady
Lowe a pretty and amiable woman, though there was something of the
actress about her. Sir Hudson Lowe married a short time before his
departure from Europe, for the express purpose, it is said, of having
his wife to assist him in doing the honours of the colony. I understand
that this lady was the widow of an officer of the regiment which Sir
Hudson Lowe formerly commanded, and the sister of a colonel killed at
Waterloo.

The Governor showed me the most marked politeness and attention. He
remarked that we were old acquaintances, though I was not aware of the
fact. He said he had been much gratified by the perusal of M. Lesage’s
Atlas, though he had never dreamed that he should one day be introduced
to the author. He had first seen the work in Sicily, where he got it
smuggled from Naples; and he was inexhaustible in his praises of it. He
had frequently read the account of the battle of Jena, with General
Blucher, at the head-quarters where he was English commissioner, during
the campaign of 1814. He said that he had always admired the liberal
expressions and the spirit of moderation and impartiality which were
observed towards England; but that at the period when he first examined
the work, he had been forcibly struck by some equivocal passages which
seemed to breathe hostility to, or censure of, him who then governed us.
He added that he had accounted for these passages at the time, by my
character and doctrines as an emigrant; but that now he thought it a
singular contradiction, to find me here in the suite of that person.

Now we had just been informed that Sir Hudson Lowe was, when in Italy, a
kind of Head Police Officer, and an active agent of the system of
_espionage_. I could not help suspecting that a certain insinuation was
intended to be conveyed in these remarks. If this were really the fact
(and the Emperor entertained no doubt of it), then, at least, the
business was cleverly managed on his part; and had I felt less
self-respect than I did I could have given a smart retort, and the
matter might have been carried to some length. I, however, merely
replied that he had totally misunderstood the application of the
equivocal passages in question, and that they could not have any
reference to Napoleon, since I was now attached to his person.

On my return home, I found two French works which Sir H. Lowe had sent
to me in the morning, accompanied by a note, in which he expressed a
hope that their perusal would gratify the Emperor. Will it be credited?
One of these works was the Abbé de Pradt’s Embassy to Warsaw. This I may
note down as Sir Hudson Lowe’s _first ill-natured trick_. The work was a
novelty, it is true; but it was a libel solely directed against
Napoleon.

As to the other book, when I first saw it, I thought I had found a
treasure. I imagined it would indemnify us for the want of the Moniteur,
and furnish us with the materials which we stood so much in need of. Its
title described it to be a collection of all the proclamations and
official documents of Napoleon, as General, First Consul, and Emperor.
But it was published by Goldsmith the libeller, and was very incomplete,
the most striking bulletins being suppressed, the addresses to the
Legislative Body mutilated, &c. But, even in this imperfect state, the
collection still remains the noblest monument that any man ever left
behind him.

After dinner the Emperor amused himself by reading, in Goldsmith’s
publications, some of his own proclamations to the army of Italy. They
produced a powerful impression on himself; they interested and excited
him. “And yet,” said he, “they had the impudence to say that I could not
write!”

He then turned to his proclamation to the army of Egypt, and joked much
about that in which he represented himself as inspired and sent by God.
“This was quackery,” said he; “but it was quackery of the highest order.
Besides, the proclamation was composed only for the purpose of being
translated into high-flown Arabic verse by one of the cleverest of the
Sheiks. My French troops,” continued he, “merely laughed at it; and such
was their disposition in this respect that, in order to induce them to
listen to the bare mention of religion, I was myself obliged to speak
very lightly on the subject, to place Jews beside Christians, and Rabbis
beside Bishops, &c.”

The assertion made by Goldsmith of Napoleon’s having assumed the
Mussulman dress, is totally false. If ever he entered a mosque, he said,
it was always as a conqueror, and not as a worshipper. He was of too
serious a turn, and had too much self-respect, to act in an equivocal
way on this point.

“After all,” continued he, gaily, “it would not have been so very
extraordinary, even though circumstances had induced me to embrace
Islamism; and, as a good Queen of France once said, ‘_You will talk to
me so much about it!_’... But I must have had good reasons for my
conversion. I must have had possession of all as far as the Euphrates,
at least. Change of religion for private interest is inexcusable; but it
may be pardoned in consideration of immense political results. Henry IV.
said, ‘_Paris is well worth a mass_.’ Will it then be said that the
dominion of the East, and perhaps the subjugation of all Asia, were not
worth a turban and a pair of trousers? And, in truth, the whole matter
was reduced to this; for the grand Sheiks had studied how to render it
easy to us. They had smoothed down the greatest obstacles; allowed us
the use of wine, and dispensed with all corporeal formalities. We should
therefore have lost only our small-clothes and hats. I say we; for the
army, in the disposition in which it then was, would have entertained
but few scruples on the subject, and would have made it a mere matter of
jest and laughter. But what would have been the consequence? I should
have turned my back on Europe, and the old civilization of the continent
would have been bound up. And who would then have troubled themselves
about the course of Fate in France, or the regeneration of the age!...
Who would have attempted it! Who could have succeeded!”

Continuing his examination of Goldsmith’s book, the Emperor by chance
cast his eyes on the Act of the Consuls, by which General Latour Foissac
was cashiered for the surrender of Mantua. “This,” said the Emperor,
“was, without doubt, an illegal and tyrannical act, but it was a
necessary evil; it was the fault of the laws. The general was a hundred
and a thousand times guilty, and yet it was doubtful whether we ought to
have condemned him. His acquittal would have produced the most fatal
effect. We therefore struck the blow with the combined arms of honour
and opinion. But I say again, it was a tyrannical act, one of those
severe strokes which are sometimes indispensably necessary in a great
nation, and under important circumstances.”

THE FIRST INSULT, AND THE FIRST INSTANCE OF CRUELTY, ON THE PART OF THE
  GOVERNOR.—CHARACTERISTIC TRAITS.

27th.—About two o’clock, the Governor came to Longwood, and asked the
Emperor’s leave to summon all the domestics before him. This was the
first insult received from the Governor.

He probably wished to ascertain whether their declarations had been
spontaneously made. M. de Montholon, who had the superintendence of the
servants, informed Sir Hudson Lowe, in the Emperor’s name, that his
Majesty had not imagined there could have been any pretence for
interference between him and his valet de chambre; that, if his
permission were asked, he decidedly refused it; that, if the Governor’s
instructions required the adoption of this measure, the power was in his
own hands, and he might use it: this would only be adding another
outrage to those which the English Ministers had already accumulated
upon him.

At this moment I joined M. de Montholon and the Governor. I could easily
perceive that the two interlocutors were by no means pleased with each
other. After a few moments’ silence and evident dissatisfaction, the
Governor turned to me, and remarked that pains seemed to be taken to
create difficulties and embarrassments in all that regarded the Emperor.
I observed that Napoleon’s household having been appointed for him, and
not being one of his choice, it was perfectly natural that he should
object to any interference with his servants; that, if the Governor had
any doubts to clear up relative to the domestics, two courses were open
to him. He might resort to indirect and underhand means, which at least
would not wound our feelings; or he might employ force and authority;
that he possessed these, and there was nothing to restrain him from
resorting to them. But I added that the method he was pursuing was quite
hostile to our habits. I assured him that the Emperor was desirous of
being as accommodating as possible, in the new situation in which he was
placed: that he wished to retire within himself, asking for nothing but
to be left unannoyed: that fortune had indeed robbed him of his power,
but that nothing could deprive him of his self-respect: and, finally,
that the consciousness and the delicacy of his dignity were the only
things that remained to him of which he could call himself the master.

Meanwhile the servants were assembled, and M. de Montholon and I
withdrew, that we might not sanction such a measure by our presence. The
Governor spoke to the domestics, and afterwards joined us, saying:—"I am
now satisfied. I can inform the English Government that they all signed
it freely and voluntarily."

But his ill-humour was not yet fully spent; for he began most
inopportunely to extol the beautiful situation of Longwood, observing
that, after all, we were not so very badly off. And when we remarked
that we felt most severely the want of shade in this burning climate,
and that there was scarcely a single tree on the Island. “Oh! we will
plant some!” said he. Could any thing have been more cutting?... This
may be recorded as the first trait of brutality on the part of the
Governor. After this he took his leave.

About five o’clock the Emperor got into the carriage to take an airing.
As we were going out, he said, “Gentlemen, but for one man I should have
been master of the world! And who do you think this one man was?” We
were all eagerness to know.... “The Abbé de Pradt,” continued the
Emperor, “the Almoner of the God of War.” On hearing this we could not
repress our laughter. “I am serious,” continued he, “the Abbé thus
expresses himself in his Embassy to Warsaw; you may read it yourselves.
The work is altogether a wicked attack on me, an absolute libel,
overwhelming me with insults and calumnies. Whether I happened to be in
a particularly good-humour at the time, or whether it was because only
truth offends, I know not; but, at all events, I laughed heartily when I
read the work, and it afforded me abundant entertainment.”

Misunderstandings occasionally occurred between two individuals of the
Emperor’s suite. This circumstance would not have been mentioned here,
but that it serves to introduce some characteristic traits of the mind
and heart of him to whom we are devoted. The newspapers of the time, and
the return of one of the parties to Europe, in consequence of these
misunderstandings, however, have already given publicity to the affair.

When I entered the drawing-room, to wait until the announcement of
dinner, I found the Emperor speaking with the utmost warmth on this
subject, which vexed him exceedingly. His language was energetic and
moving.

“You followed me,” said he, “with the view of cheering my captivity! Be
brothers, then! otherwise you but annoy me. If you wish to render me
happy, be brothers, or you are but a torment to me! You talk of
fighting, and that before my face. I am no longer then the object of
your attention. You forget that the observation of foreigners is fixed
on you.... I wish you all to be animated by my spirit.... I wish that
every one around me should be happy, and share the few enjoyments that
yet remain to us. Even down to little Emmanuel there, I would wish you
all to have your due share....”

The announcement of dinner put an end to the reprimand. The Emperor was
silent during the repast; at the dessert he ordered Voltaire to be
brought to him, and began to read some of his dramas; but he soon laid
aside the books. We daily became more and more tired of Voltaire.

The Emperor retired very early, and soon after desired me to attend him
in his bed-chamber, where I remained with him until a late hour.

             THE ABBÉ DE PRADT, AND HIS EMBASSY TO WARSAW.
                      THE RUSSIAN WAR.—ITS ORIGIN.

28th.—The Emperor again recurred to the Abbé de Pradt and his work,
which he reduced to merely the first and last pages. “In the first,”
said he, "he states himself to be the only man who arrested Napoleon’s
career; in the last, he shows that the Emperor, in his way back from
Moscow, dismissed him from the embassy, which is true; and this fact his
self-love would fain misrepresent or revenge. This is the whole work....

“But the Abbé,” continued the Emperor, “did not fulfil at Warsaw any of
the objects which had been intended; on the contrary, he did a great
deal of mischief. Reports against him poured in upon me from every
quarter. Even the young men, the clerks attached to the embassy, were
surprised at his conduct, and went so far as to accuse him of
maintaining an understanding with the enemy; which, however, I by no
means believed. But he certainly had a long conversation with me, which
he misrepresents, as might be expected; and it was at the very moment
when he was delivering a long prosing speech, which appeared to me a
mere string of absurdity and impertinence, that I scrawled on the corner
of the chimney-piece the order to withdraw him from his embassy, and to
send him as soon as possible to France; a circumstance which was the
cause of a good deal of merriment at the time, and which the Abbé seems
very desirous of concealing.”

I cannot refrain from transcribing from the Embassy to Warsaw, M. de
Pradt’s account of the Emperor Napoleon’s court at Dresden. His remarks
on this subject are striking, and afford a faithful picture both of men
and things at that period.

“You,” he says, "who wish to form a just idea of the omnipotence
exercised in Europe by the Emperor Napoleon, who wish to fathom the
depths of terror into which almost every European sovereign has fallen,
transport yourselves in imagination to Dresden, and there contemplate
that superb Prince, at the period of his highest glory, so nearly
bordering on his fall!

"The Emperor occupied the state apartments of the palace whither he had
transferred a considerable portion of his household. Here he gave grand
dinner parties; and, with the exception of the first Sunday, when the
King of Saxony had a gala, Napoleon’s parties were always attended by
the Sovereigns and different members of their families, according to the
invitations issued by the Grand Marshal of the Palace. Some private
individuals were admitted on these occasions. I enjoyed that honour on
the day of my appointment to the embassy of Warsaw.

"The Emperor’s levees were held here, as at the Tuileries, at nine
o’clock. Then with what timid submission did a crowd of Princes,
mingling with the courtiers, and often scarcely perceived among them,
anxiously await the moment for presenting themselves before the new
arbiter of their destinies!"

These passages, and some others of equal truth and beauty of diction,
are lost amidst a heap of details full of misrepresentation and malice.
“They are distorted facts and mutilated conversations,” said the
Emperor: and, adverting to the accounts of the Empress of Austria, which
were filled with adulation, and of the Emperor Alexander, whose amiable
virtues and brilliant qualities are extolled by the author, to the
detriment of Napoleon. “Surely,” exclaimed the Emperor, “this is not a
French bishop, but one of the eastern magi—a worshipper of the rising
sun.” I shall both now and henceforward suppress, from a feeling of
justice, several other articles and many details. The following
observations may however be noted down, in opposition to the Abbé de
Pradt’s endeavours to prove that the French were the unjust aggressors
in the contest with Russia.

The Emperor, speaking of the Russian war, said: "No events are trifling
with regard to nations and sovereigns; for it is such that govern their
destinies. For some time a misunderstanding had sprung up between France
and Russia. France reproached Russia with the violation of the
continental system, and Russia required an indemnification for the Duke
of Oldenburg, and raised other pretensions. Russian troops were
approaching the duchy of Warsaw, and a French army was forming in the
north of Germany. Yet we were far from being determined on war, when,
all on a sudden, a new Russian army commenced its march towards the
Duchy; and, as an ultimatum, an insolent note was presented at Paris by
the Russian Ambassador, who, in the event of its nonacceptance,
threatened to quit Paris in eight days. I considered this as a
declaration of war. It was long since I had been accustomed to this sort
of tone. I was not in the habit of allowing myself to be anticipated. I
could march to Russia at the head of the rest of Europe; the enterprise
was popular; the cause was one which interested Europe. It was the last
effort that remained to France. Her fate, and that of the new European
system, depended on the struggle. Russia was the last resource of
England. The peace of the whole world rested with Russia. The event
could not be doubtful. I commenced my march; but when I reached the
frontier I, to whom Russia had declared war by withdrawing her
Ambassador, still considered it my duty to send mine (Lauriston) to the
Emperor Alexander at Wilna: he was rejected, and the war commenced!

"Yet, who would credit it? Alexander and myself were in the situation of
two bullies, who, without wishing to fight, were endeavouring to terrify
each other. I would most willingly have maintained peace; I was
surrounded and overwhelmed with unfavourable circumstances, and all that
I have since learned convinces me that Alexander was still less eager
for war than myself.

"M. de Romanzoff, who had maintained communications at Paris, and who
some time afterwards, when the Russians experienced reverses, was very
severely treated by Alexander for the course he had induced him to
pursue, had assured the Russian Emperor, that the moment was come when
Napoleon, in his embarrassments, would readily make some sacrifices to
avoid war; that the favourable opportunity should not be allowed to
escape; that it was only necessary to assume a bold attitude, and a tone
of firmness; that indemnity would be obtained for the Duke of Oldenburg;
that Dantzick might be gained, and that Russia would thus acquire
immense weight in Europe.

"Such was the cause of the movement of the Russian troops, and of the
insolent note of Prince Kourakin, who, doubtless, was not in the secret,
and who had been foolish enough to execute his instructions in too
literal a way. The same mistaken notions, and the same system also,
occasioned the refusal to receive Lauriston at Wilna. This was an
instance of the errors and misfortunes which attended my new diplomacy.
It stood insulated, without affinity or contact, in the midst of the
objects which it had to direct. Had my Minister for Foreign affairs been
a member of the old aristocracy, and a man of superior ability, no doubt
he would have observed the cloud that was gathering, and might have
prevented our going to war.

“Talleyrand, perhaps, might have done this: but it was above the powers
of the new school. I could not make the discovery myself; my dignity
precluded personal explanations. I could form my judgment only from
documents, and in vain did I turn them over and over, for I was sure at
last to arrive at a point where they could make no reply to my
enquiries.

"Scarcely had I opened the campaign, when the mask fell, and the real
sentiments of the enemy were developed. In the course of two or three
days Alexander, alarmed at our first successes, despatched a messenger
to me, to say that if I would evacuate the invaded territory, and fall
back as far as the Niemen, he would enter upon negotiations. But I in my
turn took this for a stratagem. I was elated with success; I had taken
the Russian army in the very fact, in the critical moment; I had cut off
Bagration, and I had reason to hope that I should destroy him. I
thought, however, that the enemy merely wanted to gain time for the
purpose of rallying his forces. Had I been convinced of Alexander’s
sincerity, I should doubtless have acceded to his proposition of falling
back to the Niemen. In that case, he would not have passed the Dwina;
Wilna would have been neutralized: and there Alexander and myself,
accompanied by a few battalions of our guards, would have negotiated in
person. How many arrangements should I not have proposed!... Alexander
would have had only to take his choice, and we should have separated
good friends.

"Yet, in spite of the events which succeeded, and which left my enemy
triumphant, is it quite certain that the measures I have just hinted at
would have been less advantageous than those which have since been
pursued? Alexander marched to Paris, it is true, but he came accompanied
by the forces of all Europe. He has gained Poland: but what will be the
result of the shock given to the whole European system; of the agitation
into which every nation has been thrown; of the increase of European
influence over the rest of Russia through the accumulation of new
acquisitions: the expeditions in which the Russian troops are engaged in
remote quarters; and the influence of the incongruous mass of men and
knowledge which have taken refuge in Russia from foreign parts?

“Will the Russian sovereigns be content to consolidate what they have
acquired? If, on the contrary, they should be influenced by ambition,
what extravagant enterprises may they not attempt! And yet they have
lost Moscow, her wealth and resources, and those of many other cities!
These are wounds which will bleed for half a century. But at Wilna we
might have entered into arrangements for the advantage of all, subjects
as well as sovereigns!”

On another occasion, the Emperor said, "I might have shared with Russia
the possession of the Turkish empire. We had oftener than once
contemplated the idea, but Constantinople was always the obstacle that
opposed its execution. The Turkish capital was the grand stumbling-block
between us. Russia wanted it, and I could not resign it. Constantinople
is worth an empire of itself. It is the real keystone of power; for he
who possesses it may rule the world.

“What then?” said the Emperor, resuming the former question, “what has
Alexander gained, which he might not have secured to better advantage at
Wilna?”—Some one present replied, “Sire, he has conquered, and he
remains triumphant.”—"That may be the vulgar opinion," exclaimed the
Emperor, "but no Sovereign should entertain such an idea. A monarch, if
he himself governs, or his councillors, if they govern for him, must, in
vast enterprises of this nature, attach less importance to the victory
than to its results. And even though the case be limited to vulgar
considerations, still I maintain that the wished-for object has not been
attained. Even here the palm must be awarded to the vanquished party.
Who will pretend that my victories in Germany were equalled by the
successes of the Allies in France? Will any thinking man, will any
historian pronounce such an opinion?

"The Allies advanced with all Europe in their train, against a force
which might be almost counted as nothing. They had 600,000 men in the
line, and nearly an equal number in reserve. If they had been beaten,
they had nothing to fear, they could have fallen back. I, on the
contrary, in Germany, 500 leagues from home, had hardly a force equal to
my enemy’s. I was surrounded by sovereigns and people repressed only by
fear, and who, on the first disaster, were ready to rise against me. But
I triumphed amidst dangers constantly increasing; I was incessantly
compelled to exercise an equal degree of address and energy. In all
these enterprises I found it necessary to display a strange character,
strange views and a strange confidence in my own plans, which were
disapproved perhaps by every one around me.

"What deeds on the part of the Allies can be compared with these? If I
had not conquered at Austerlitz, I should have had all Prussia on me. If
I had not proved victorious at Jena, Austria and Spain would have
assailed me in my rear. If I had not triumphed at Wagram, which by the
by, was a less decisive victory, I had to fear that Russia would abandon
me, that Prussia would rise against me; and meanwhile the English were
already before Antwerp.

"Yet what was my conduct after the victory? At Austerlitz, I gave
Alexander his liberty, though I might have made him my prisoner.[9]
After Jena I left the House of Prussia in possession of a throne which I
had conquered: after Wagram, I neglected to parcel out the Austrian
monarchy.

Footnote 9:

  Since my return to Europe, I have been assured that there exist two
  notes, written in pencil by the Emperor Alexander, urgently soliciting
  that he might be allowed to pass. If this be true, what a singular
  vicissitude of fortune presents itself! The magnanimous Conqueror was
  doomed to perish in captivity, far from Europe, and separated from his
  family; and this too, in the name of the conquered party, to whose
  prayers he had so generously listened.

“If all this be attributed merely to magnanimity, cold and calculating
politicians will doubtless blame me. But, without rejecting that
sentiment, to which I am not a stranger, I had higher aims in view. I
wished to bring about the amalgamation of the great European interests,
in the same manner as I had effected the union of parties in France. My
ambition was one day to become the arbiter in the great cause of nations
and kings; it was therefore necessary that I should secure to myself
claims on their gratitude, and seek to render myself popular among them.
This I could not do without losing something in the estimation of the
people. I was aware of this. But I was powerful and fearless. I
concerned myself but little about transient popular murmurs, being very
sure that the result would infallibly bring the people over to my side.

“I committed a great fault after the battle of Wagram, in not reducing
the power of Austria still more. She remained too strong for our safety,
and to her we must attribute our ruin. The day after the battle, I
should have made known, by proclamation, that I would treat with Austria
only on condition of the preliminary separation of the three crowns of
Austria, Hungary, and Bohemia. Will it be credited? A Prince of the
House of Austria several times hinted to me the idea of transferring one
of the two last-mentioned crowns to himself, or even raising him to the
throne occupied by his own family, on pretence that it was only thus
that Austria could be induced to act sincerely with me. He even proposed
to give me, by way of hostage, ——— and moreover, every possible
guarantee.”

The Emperor said, that he had even turned this idea over in his own
mind. He had hesitated about it for some time previously to his marriage
with Maria Louisa; but after that event, continued he, it became
impracticable. He observed that on the subject of marriage his notions
were too citizen-like:—"Austria," said he, “had become a portion of my
own family; and yet my marriage ruined me. If I had not thought myself
safe and protected by this alliance, I should have delayed for three
years the resurrection of Poland; I should have waited until Spain was
subdued and tranquil. I stepped upon an abyss, covered by flowers.”

THE EMPEROR INDISPOSED.—HIS FIRST DAY OF COMPLETE SECLUSION.—THE PERSIAN
  AND TURKISH AMBASSADORS.—ANECDOTES.

29th.—About five o’clock the Grand Marshal visited me in my chamber. He
had not been permitted to see the Emperor, who through indisposition had
been confined to his own apartment all day, and refused to see any one.
Towards evening I went out to take a stroll in those paths in which the
Emperor usually walked about this time. I felt dull, being alone. We had
dined without the Emperor.

About nine o’clock, just as I was regretting that the day had passed
over without my seeing him, he sent for me. I expressed my concern for
his indisposition. He replied that he was perfectly well, but that he
had taken a fancy to remain alone; that he had been reading all day, and
that the time had passed away swiftly and agreeably.

He however appeared low-spirited and languid. He took my Atlas, which
happened to be lying beside him, and, opening it at the map of the
world, he cast his eye on Persia. “I had some excellent plans, with
regard to that country,” said he. “What a capital point of support would
it have been for my lever, whether I wished to disturb Russia, or to
invade India. I had set on foot relations with Persia, and I hoped to
bring them to the point of intimacy, as well as those with Turkey. It
might have been supposed that the animals would have understood their
own interests sufficiently well to have acceded to my propositions; but
both Persians and Turks evaded me at the decisive moment. English gold
proved more powerful than my plans. Some treacherous ministers, for a
few guineas, sacrificed the prosperity of their country: which is
usually the case under seraglio monarchs or imbecile kings.”

The Emperor then, abandoning politics, began to relate some anecdotes of
the seraglio, and adverted to the Persians of Montesquiou, and his
letters, which he said were distinguished for wit, delicate
observations, and above all, for bitter satire on the time. He
afterwards spoke of the Turkish and Persian Ambassadors who were in
Paris during his reign. He asked me what impression they produced in the
French capital; whether they paid visits, and received company, &c.

I replied that, during their stay in Paris, they engrossed public
attention, and formed a kind of raree-show at Court. The Persian in
particular attracted curiosity. On his arrival, he willingly received
visitors, and as he made presents of perfumes and even shawls, he was a
great favourite with the ladies. But the great number of those who paid
their court to him soon forced him to set bounds to his liberality, and,
thenceforward, the rage being over, he was no longer thought of. I
added, that at Court, when the Emperor was not present, we sometimes
ventured, very inconsiderately to be sure, to play off tricks at the
expense of the oriental Ambassadors. At a concert given one day by the
Empress Josephine, Asker-Kan, with his long painted beard, was one of
the company. He seemed to be heartily tired of the music, and fell
asleep standing with his back against a wall, his feet thrust forward
and resting against an arm chair which stood in the corner by the
fire-place. Some one, by way of joke, drew the chair away softly, so
that his Excellency had well nigh fallen down at full length on the
floor, and being thus roused from his slumber, he roared out lustily.
Asker-Kan could more readily enter into a joke than the Turkish
Ambassador; but, on this occasion he was in a great passion, and as we
could only understand each other by gestures, the scene was most
ludicrous. In the evening, the Empress enquired the cause of the noise
which she had heard during the concert; and when the circumstance was
explained to her, she laughed a good deal and scolded us still more. “It
was very wrong, certainly,” observed the Emperor; “but what business had
he at the concert?”—"Sire," I replied, “both he and the Turkish
Ambassador went thither with the view of paying court to you. They hoped
that your Majesty would be apprized of the circumstance, though you were
at that time five hundred leagues off.” I added that on other occasions
they had both proved themselves accomplished courtiers, and that their
wish to ingratiate themselves with the Emperor carried them to the most
extravagant lengths. “We have often seen them,” said I, “at the close of
the grand diplomatic audiences on Sunday, follow your Majesty to mass,
and occupy the pews in the chapel along with Cardinals of the Holy
Catholic Church.”—"What a monstrous spectacle!" exclaimed the Emperor.
“What a subversion of their principles and habits!—What extraordinary
things I brought about; and yet all this was neither ordered nor
perceived.”

The conversation continuing on the two orientals, I mentioned that I had
been informed the Arch-chancellor Cambacérès once gave them a grand
dinner. Though both from the same quarter, and members of the same
religion, yet they nevertheless evinced shades of character totally
different. The Turk, who was a disciple of Omar, was the Jansenist, and
the Persian, who was a sectary of Ali, was the Jesuit. It was said that,
at Cambacérès’ dinner, they scrupulously watched each other with regard
to the wine, just as two Catholic Bishops seated at the same table might
be expected to keep a vigilant look out, lest either should be tempted
to eat meat on a Friday.

The Turk was gloomy and ignorant, and was looked upon as little better
than a brute; but the Persian possessed literary information, was very
talkative, and had the reputation of being a clever man. It was observed
that he made no use of a knife and fork, either in eating or helping
himself to any dish at table; and he probably would not have hesitated
to help his neighbours in the same unceremonious way. One of our customs
particularly attracted his notice; this was our practice of eating bread
with every dish. He said he could not conceive why we were obliged
always to eat the same article with every thing.

I believe I have already remarked that nothing amuses the Emperor so
much as accounts of the fashionable world in Paris, anecdotes of our
drawing-rooms, &c.

The Emigrants and the Faubourg St. Germain were subjects on which he was
always fond of conversing with me when we were alone, and he accounted
for this by saying to me once, “I was well acquainted with every thing
that had relation to myself, but I never knew any thing of those
affairs.” He observed, that he had nevertheless a natural desire to
learn every thing that was passing near him, and to hear the chit-chat
of little towns, &c. “I heard a great deal on these subjects,” added he,
“during the period of my power; but whenever any thing favourable was
said, I put myself on my guard—I was fearful of insinuations; and if, on
the contrary, any thing unfavourable was reported to me, I mistrusted
the accusation, and had enough to do to guard against a feeling of
contempt. Here, my dear Las Cases, none of these disadvantages exist;
you and I already belong to the other world; we are conversing in the
Elysian fields: you are without interested views, and I am without
suspicion.” I therefore eagerly seized every opportunity that offered
itself to entertain the Emperor in this way. He perceived this, and gave
me credit for my intentions; for, at the conclusion of one of my
stories, he pinched my ear, and said, in a tone of voice which delighted
me: “I read a story in your Atlas of a Northern Monarch who was immured
in a prison, and one of his soldiers solicited and obtained permission
to be imprisoned with him, in order that he might cheer his spirits,
either by inducing him to converse, or by relating amusing stories to
him. My dear Las Cases, you are that soldier.”...

On the present occasion I described to the Emperor the hoax which had
been played upon M. de Marbois, and which he had not heard of before. It
was as follows: one day, as the story goes, Asker-Kan, who was
indisposed, and tired of his Persian treatment, gave orders to send for
M. Bourdois, one of the first physicians in Paris. The messenger made a
mistake, and went to M. de Marbois, Ex-minister of the Treasury, and at
that time President of the Court of Accounts.—"His Excellency the
Persian Ambassador," said he, “is very ill, and wishes to see you.” M.
de Marbois could not conceive what business the Persian Ambassador could
possibly have with him: but Asker-Kan was the envoy of a great Prince,
and there is nothing which vanity will not contrive to reconcile. He
proceeded with great pomp to the Ambassador’s residence; and it must be
allowed that there was nothing in his dress, physiognomy, or deportment,
at all likely to undeceive the Persian, who, as soon as he saw him,
thrust out his tongue, and stretching forth his arm, motioned him to
feel his pulse. These extraordinary gestures astonished M. de Marbois,
but he thought they might be some oriental fashion. He took the hand
which was offered, and pressed it cordially, when four attendants
entered with solemnity, and presented to the Ex-minister a vessel of a
very unequivocal nature, for his better information on the state of the
patient. At this spectacle, the grave M. de Marbois flew into a violent
passion, and asked what was the meaning of this extraordinary behaviour.
The mistake was explained; it was M. Bourdois who had been wanted, and
the similarity in the sound of the two names had alone occasioned the
error. Poor M. de Marbois was the laughing-stock of Paris, and for a
long time he could not show his face any where without exciting
merriment.

“The drawing-rooms of Paris are indeed tremendous with their jokes!”
said the Emperor, “for it cannot be denied that they are for the most
part pointed and witty. They always assail the enemy at the breach, and
a total defeat is the usual consequence.”—"It is true," said I, “nothing
was spared. Even religion was not held sacred, and your Majesty may well
suppose that neither you nor the Empress escaped.”—"I dare say not,"
replied the Emperor, “but no matter; what was said of us?”—“It was
reported. Sire, that one day your Majesty, being much dissatisfied at
the perusal of a despatch from Vienna, said to the Empress, in a moment
of ill-humour, Your father is a blockhead (_votre père est une
ganache_). Maria Louisa, who was unacquainted with many French phrases,
turned to the person nearest her, and, observing that the Emperor had
called her Father a _ganache_, asked what the term meant. The courtier,
embarrassed at this unexpected interrogatory, stammered out that the
word signified a clever man, a man of judgment, and extraordinary
talent. Some time afterwards, the Empress, with her newly learnt term
fresh in her memory, was present at the Council of State, and the
discussion, becoming somewhat warm, in order to put a stop to it, she
called on M. Cambacérès, who was yawning by her side....—‘You must set
us right on this important point,’ said she, ‘you shall be our oracle;
for I consider you as the greatest _ganache_ in the Empire.’” At these
words the Emperor held his sides with laughter. “What a pity,” said he,
“that this anecdote is not true! Only imagine the scene. The offended
dignity of Cambacérès, the merriment of the whole council, and the
embarrassment of poor Maria Louisa, alarmed at the success of her
unconscious joke.”

The conversation continued for a long time in this way, and I spent
about two hours with the Emperor; I had exerted myself to talk as much
as I possibly could to divert him, and I had succeeded. The Emperor felt
his spirits revived, he even enjoyed a hearty laugh. When he dismissed
me, he felt much better, and I was happy at the change.

SECOND DAY OF SECLUSION.—THE EMPEROR RECEIVES THE GOVERNOR IN HIS
  CHAMBER.—CHARACTERISTIC CONVERSATION.

30th.—To-day I and my son were engaged to dine at Mr. Balcombe’s at the
Briars. About half past three, I went to receive the Emperor’s commands:
he was the same as yesterday, and did not intend to go out.

Just before I had reached Hut’s Gate, the residence of Madame Bertrand,
I met the Governor on his way to Longwood. He asked me how the Emperor
was. I told him that I felt uneasy about him, and that he had not seen
any of us yesterday. I added that though he had told me this morning he
was well, yet from his countenance I should have expected a different
account.

About half past nine, we set out from the Briars on our return to
Longwood; it was very dark. A heavy rain had come on, which was as sharp
and cutting as hail. We had a most disagreeable, troublesome, and
dangerous ride, being every moment on the point of being precipitated
into some abyss or other, for we were obliged to gallop on at random
without seeing where we were going. We arrived at Longwood drenched to
the skin.

The Emperor had given orders that I should attend him on my return. He
was well, but he had stayed at home as he had done yesterday. He said he
had been waiting for me, and had many things to tell me.

On learning that the Governor had arrived, he admitted him into his
chamber, though he was not dressed, and was unable to rise from his
couch. He said he had discussed with him, in perfect composure, all the
points which naturally presented themselves to his mind. He spoke of
protesting against the treaty of the second of August, in which the
Allied Sovereigns declared him an exile and a prisoner. He asked what
right these Sovereigns had to dispose of him, without his consent, him
who was their equal, and had sometimes been their master. He said, if he
had thought proper to withdraw to Russia, Alexander, who styled himself
his friend, and who never had any but political disputes with him, would
if he had not upheld him as a king, at least have treated him as one.
This the Governor could not deny. He said, had he thought proper to take
refuge in Austria, the Emperor Francis could not, without disgracing
himself, have denied him admission not only to his empire, but even to
his house and his family, of which he, Napoleon, was a member. This the
Governor also admitted.

“Lastly,” said the Emperor, “if, relying on my own individual interests,
I had persisted in defending them in France by force of arms, there is
no doubt that the Allies would have formally granted me immense
advantages, perhaps even territory.” The Governor, who hesitated for
some time on this point, at length agreed that there was no doubt the
Emperor might with ease have obtained a Sovereignty. “I did not wish
it,” continued the Emperor: “I determined on abandoning public affairs;
indignant at beholding the leading men in France betraying their
country, or at least committing the grossest errors with regard to her
interests; indignant at finding that the mass of the representatives
preferred disgrace to death, and stooped to traffic with that sacred
independence, which, like honour, should be _a rocky and inaccessible
island_. In this state of things what did I determine on? What
resolution did I adopt? I sought an asylum in a country which was
supposed to be governed by laws: among a people, of whom for twenty
years I had been the bitterest enemy! But what did you do?... Your
conduct will be recorded in history to your eternal disgrace. Yet there
is an avenging Providence; sooner or later you will receive your
punishment! It will not be long before your posterity, your laws, will
expiate your crime!... Your ministers have sufficiently proved, by their
instructions, that they wish to get rid of me! Why did not the Kings who
proscribed me openly decree my death? One act would have been as legal
as the other! A speedy termination to my sufferings would have shown
more energy than the lingering death to which they have doomed me. The
Calabrians have been more humane, more generous than the Allied
Sovereigns or your Ministers. I will not die by my own hands. That would
be an act of cowardice. To overcome misfortune is a proof of a noble and
courageous mind! We mortals are bound to fulfil our destinies. But if it
be intended to keep me here, I feel that you would be doing me a
kindness in depriving me of life; for here I daily suffer the agonies of
death! The limits of St. Helena are too narrow for me, who was every day
accustomed to ride, ten, fifteen, or twenty leagues on horseback. The
climate is not like ours: neither the sun nor the seasons are like what
we have been accustomed to. Every thing here is hostile to happiness and
comfort. The situation is disagreeable and unwholesome, and is destitute
of water. This part of the island is totally barren and has been
deserted by the inhabitants.”

The Governor stated that his instructions required that the Emperor
should be restricted to certain limits in his rides, and that an officer
should always accompany him. “If they had been thus enforced,” replied
the Emperor, “I should never have left my chamber. If your instructions
will not admit of greater latitude, you can henceforth do nothing for
us. However, I neither ask nor wish for any thing. Convey these
sentiments to the English Government.”

“This,” said the Governor, “is the consequence of transmitting
instructions from so great a distance, and with regard to a person of
whom those who draw up the instructions know so little.” He then
endeavoured to shift the question by intimating that, on the arrival of
the wooden house or palace, which was on its way to St. Helena, better
plans might perhaps be adopted: that a vessel was expected, bringing
furniture and stores of provisions, which it was supposed would be
agreeable to the Emperor; that the English Government was exerting every
effort to alleviate his situation, &c.

The Emperor replied that all their efforts amounted to little; that he
had requested to be furnished with the Morning Chronicle and the
Statesman, that he might read what related to himself under the least
disagreeable forms: but his request had never been complied with. He had
asked for books, which were his only consolation; but nine months had
passed away, and he had not received any. He had desired to obtain
intelligence of his wife and son; but this had been withheld from him.

“As to the provisions, the furniture, and the house, that are intended
for me,” continued he, “you and I, Sir, are soldiers; we know how to
value these things. You have been in my native city, perhaps in the very
house occupied by my family. Though it was not the worst on the
island—though I have no reason to be ashamed of my family circumstances,
yet you know what they were. But though I have occupied a throne, and
have disposed of crowns, I have not forgotten my first condition; my
couch and my camp-bed, you see, are still sufficient for me.”

The Governor observed that the wooden palace and all its accompaniments
were at least an attention. “For your own satisfaction, in the eyes of
Europe,” replied the Emperor, “but to me they are matters of perfect
indifference. It is not a house, nor furniture, that should have been
sent to me: but an executioner and a coffin. The former are a mockery,
the latter would be a favour. I say, again, the instructions of your
ministers tend to this result, and I invoke it. The Admiral, who is not
an ill-disposed man, appears to me now to have softened these
instructions; I do not complain of his acts: his forms alone offended
me.” Here the Governor asked whether he had unconsciously committed any
faults. “No, Sir, we complain of nothing since your arrival. Yet one act
has offended us, and that is your inspection of our domestics. It was
insulting to M. de Montholon, by appearing to throw suspicion on his
integrity; and it was petty, disagreeable, and insulting towards me, and
perhaps degrading to the English General himself, who thus came to
interfere between me and my valet de chambre.”

The Governor was seated in an arm-chair on one side of the Emperor, who
had remained stretched on his couch. It was dark, the evening was
drawing in, and it was not easy to distinguish objects. “Therefore,”
observed the Emperor, “it was in vain that I endeavoured to watch the
play of his features, and to observe the impression which my words made
on him.”

In the course of the conversation the Emperor, who in the morning had
been reading the Campaign of 1814, by Alphonse de Beauchamp, in which
all the English bulletins bore the signature Lowe, asked the Governor if
he was the individual who had signed them. Sir Hudson Lowe, with marked
embarrassment, replied in the affirmative, and added that the bulletins
represented his views and opinions. The Governor, who had several times
proposed that the Emperor should be attended by his physician, who he
said was a very skilful man, on taking his leave again proposed to send
his Doctor to Longwood. But the Emperor saw his motives, and constantly
resisted his offer.

Having related all these particulars to me, the Emperor remained silent
for some minutes. Then resuming, apparently after some reflection, he
said: "How mean and disagreeable is the expression of the Governor’s
countenance! I never saw any thing like it in my life!... I should be
unable to drink my coffee if this man were left for a moment alone
beside me.... My dear Las Cases, they have sent me worse than a
jailor!..."

             THIRD DAY OF THE EMPEROR’S SECLUSION.—SUMMARY
                            OF HIS HISTORY.

May 1st.—The Emperor kept his room to-day as he had done yesterday. I
felt ill from my ride from the Briars; I had a slight fever, accompanied
by great lassitude. The Emperor sent for me about seven o’clock in the
evening. I went to his chamber and found him reading Rollin, whom he
accused, as usual, of being too indulgent an historian. He did not
appear to have been indisposed, and even said he was very well; but this
only rendered me the more uneasy at his seclusion and his calmness of
manner. He put off dinner to a later hour than usual, and detained me
with him. He called for a glass of Constantia some time before dinner;
this he generally does when he feels the want of excitement.

After dinner, he looked over a few of the addresses, proclamations, or
acts, in Goldsmith’s imperfect collection. The perusal of some of these
documents seemed to interest him; then, laying down the book, he began
to walk about, and said, "After all, let them abridge, suppress, and
mutilate as much as they please, they will find it very difficult to
throw me entirely into the shade. The historian of France cannot pass
over the Empire, and if he has any honesty, he will not fail to render
me my share of justice. His task will be easy; for the facts speak for
themselves: they shine like the sun.

“I closed the gulf of anarchy and cleared the chaos. I purified the
Revolution, dignified Nations and established Kings. I excited every
kind of emulation, rewarded every kind of merit, and extended the limits
of glory! This is at least something! And on what point can I be
assailed on which an historian could not defend me? Can it be for my
intentions? But even here I can find absolution. Can it be for my
despotism? It may be demonstrated that the Dictatorship was absolutely
necessary. Will it be said that I restrained liberty? It can be proved
that licentiousness, anarchy, and the greatest irregularities, still
haunted the threshold of freedom. Shall I be accused of having been too
fond of war? It can be shown that I always received the first attack.
Will it be said that I aimed at universal monarchy? It can be proved
that this was merely the result of fortuitous circumstances, and that
our enemies themselves led me step by step to this determination.
Lastly, shall I be blamed for my ambition? This passion I must doubtless
be allowed to have possessed, and that in no small degree; but, at the
same time, my ambition was of the highest and noblest kind that ever,
perhaps, existed—that of establishing and of consecrating the empire of
reason, and the full exercise and complete enjoyment of all the human
faculties! And here the historian will probably feel compelled to regret
that such ambition should not have been fulfilled and gratified!” ...
Then after a few moments of silent reflection: “This,” said the Emperor,
“is my whole history in a few words.”

             FOURTH DAY OF ABSOLUTE SECLUSION.—THE MONITEUR
                       FAVOURABLE TO THE EMPEROR.

2nd.—The Emperor still kept his room as on the preceding days. He sent
for me about nine o’clock in the evening, after I had dined. He had seen
no one during the day; I remained with him till eleven o’clock; he was
in good spirits, and appeared to be well. I assured him that the days
which we passed without seeing him seemed very tedious; and that we
feared his health would suffer from close confinement and the want of
fresh air. For my own part, this seclusion caused me great uneasiness
and affliction. He went to bed half an hour before he dismissed me: he
said his legs refused to support him. He felt fatigued with walking,
though he had only taken a few turns with me in his chamber.

He spoke a great deal of the Legion of Honour, of Goldsmith’s
Collection, and of the Moniteur. Respecting the latter, he said that it
was certainly a very remarkable circumstance, and one of which few
besides himself could boast, that he had made his way through the
Revolution at so early an age, and with so much notoriety, without
having to dread the Moniteur. “There is not a sentence in it,” said he,
“which I could wish to obliterate. On the contrary, the Moniteur will
infallibly serve me as a justification, whenever I may have occasion for
it.”

                         FIFTH DAY’S SECLUSION.

3rd.—The Emperor still continued within doors, and saw no one; this was
his fifth day of retirement. The different individuals of his
establishment knew not how he occupied himself in his chamber. He sent
for me, as it were, by stealth, and I went to him about six o’clock in
the evening.

I again expressed to him the anxiety and pain we felt at seeing him thus
secluded. He told me that he bore the confinement very well, but that he
found the days long and the nights still longer. He had been unoccupied
during the whole day: he said he had felt himself out of humour; and,
indeed, he still continued silent and dull. He took the bath, and I
attended him. He concluded the evening by conversing on subjects of
great importance.

                        SIXTH DAY OF SECLUSION.

4th.—The Emperor still remained within doors. He had, however, expressed
his intention to ride on horseback about four o’clock; but the rain
prevented him from stirring out. He received the Grand Marshal in his
chamber.

He sent for me about eight o’clock to dine with him. He said that the
Governor had called on the Grand Marshal, and had remained with him
above an hour. His conversation had been frequently disagreeable and
sometimes even offensive. He had spoken on a variety of topics in a tone
of ill-humour and disrespect, and in a very vague and indeterminate
manner: reproaching us, particularly, as it appeared, with being very
loud and unreasonable in our complaints. He maintained that we were very
well provided for and ought to be content; that we seemed to be
strangely mistaken with regard to what was due to our persons and our
situations. He added, at least so he was understood, that he was
desirous of being assured every day, by ocular testimony, of the
existence and presence of the Emperor.

There is no doubt that this point was the real cause of his ill-humour
and agitation. Several days had passed without his having been able to
receive any report from his officer or spies, as the Emperor had not
gone out, and no one had been admitted to his presence.

But what measures would he adopt? This consideration occupied us all in
our turns. The Emperor would never submit, even at the peril of his
life, to a regular visit, which might be capriciously renewed at any
hour of the day or night. Would the Governor employ force and violence
to dispute with the Emperor a last asylum of a few square feet and a few
hours’ repose? His instructions must have been drawn up in anticipation
of the case that had now occurred. No outrage, no want of respect, no
barbarity, could surprise me.

As to the Governor’s remark that we entertained mistaken ideas with
regard to ourselves and our situation, we are very conscious that,
instead of being at the Tuileries, we are at St. Helena, and that,
instead of being masters, we are captives: how then can we be mistaken?

              ON CHINA AND RUSSIA.—RESEMBLANCE BETWEEN THE
              TWO GREAT REVOLUTIONS IN FRANCE AND ENGLAND.

5th.—About ten o’clock in the morning, the Emperor went to ride for the
first time. While he was mounting his horse, he was informed that the
Resident of the East India Company in China had come to Longwood, and
solicited the honour of being presented to him. He sent for him, and put
some questions to him with great condescension. We then rode out to call
on Madame Bertrand. The Emperor remained there above an hour; he was
weak and altered in his appearance: his conversation was languid. We
returned to Longwood. The Emperor wished to breakfast out of doors.

He sent for our host at Briars, the worthy Mr. Balcombe, and the
Resident from China, who was still at Longwood. The whole time of
breakfast was occupied in questions relating to China, its population,
laws, customs, and trade.

The Resident stated that a circumstance occurred a few years back
between the Russians and the Chinese, which might have been attended
with important results, had not Russia been entirely absorbed by the
affairs of Europe.

The Russian traveller, Krusenstern, in his voyage round the world,
anchored at Canton with his two vessels. He was received provisionally,
and was permitted, until the orders of the Court should arrive, to
dispose of the furs with which his ships were laden, and to take on
board a cargo of tea in their stead. The orders from the Chinese court
were delayed for more than a month, and M. de Krusenstern had set sail
two days before they arrived. They directed that the two vessels should
quit the port immediately: that all trade with the Russians in that
quarter was prohibited; that enough had been conceded to their Emperor
by land in the North of the Empire; that it was monstrous in him to
attempt to extend his intercourse in the South by sea; and that strong
displeasure would he manifested towards those who had suggested to them
that course. The order further decreed that, in the event of the ships
having sailed before the arrival of the answer from Pekin, the English
Factory should be charged to communicate it, through Europe, to the
Emperor of Russia.

Napoleon felt very much fatigued with his short ride; he had not left
his chamber for seven days before; this was the first time that he had
re-appeared among us. We remarked an evident change in his countenance.

He sent for me about five o’clock; the Grand Marshal was with him. The
Emperor was undressed; he had tried in vain to enjoy a little rest; he
thought he was feverish; the sensation proceeded from extreme lassitude.
The Emperor had a fire lighted, but would not have candles in his room.
We passed the time in desultory conversation in the dark, till eight
o’clock, when the Emperor sent us to dinner.

In the course of the day, the conversation had turned on the similarity
of the two great revolutions of England and France. “There are many
points, both of resemblance and difference, between these two great
events,” said the Emperor; “they afford inexhaustible subjects for
reflection.” He then made some very curious and remarkable observations.
I shall here note down his remarks on this occasion, as well as at other
intervals during the day.

"Both in France and England the storm gathered during the two feeble and
indolent reigns of James I. and Louis XV., and burst over the heads of
the unfortunate Charles I. and Louis XVI.

"Both these Sovereigns fell victims: both perished on the scaffold, and
their families were proscribed and banished.

"Both monarchies became republics, and, during that period, both nations
plunged into every excess which can degrade the human heart and
understanding. They were disgraced by scenes of madness, blood, and
outrage. Every tie of humanity was broken, and every principle
overturned.

"Both in England and France, at this period, two men vigorously stemmed
the torrent, and reigned with splendour. After these, the two hereditary
families were restored; but both pursued an erroneous course. They
committed faults; a fresh storm suddenly burst forth in both countries,
and expelled the two restored dynasties, without their being able to
offer the least resistance to the adversaries who overthrew them.

"In this singular parallel, Napoleon appears to have been in France at
once the Cromwell and the Wm. III. of England. But as every comparison
with Cromwell is in some degree odious, I must add that, if these two
celebrated men coincided in one single circumstance of their lives, it
was scarcely possible for two beings to differ more in every other
point.

"Cromwell appeared on the theatre of the world at the age of maturity.
He attained supreme rank only by dint of address, duplicity, and
hypocrisy.

"Napoleon distinguished himself at the very dawn of manhood, and his
first steps were attended by the purest glory.

"Cromwell attained supreme power, opposed and hated by all parties, and
by affixing an everlasting stain on the English revolution.

"Napoleon, on the contrary, ascended the throne by obliterating the
stains of the French revolution, and through the concurrence of all
parties, who in turn sought to gain him as their chief.

"All the glory of Cromwell was bought by English blood; his triumphs
were all so many causes of national mourning; but Napoleon’s victories
were gained over the foreign foe, and they filled the French nation with
transport.

"Finally, the death of Cromwell was a source of joy to all England: the
event was regarded as a public deliverance. The same cannot exactly be
said of Napoleon’s fall.

"In England the revolution was the rising of the whole nation against
the King. The King had violated the laws, and usurped absolute power;
and the nation wished to resume her rights.

"In France, the revolution was the rising of one portion of the nation
against another; that of the third estate against the nobility; it was
the re-action of the Gauls against the Franks. The King was attacked not
so much in his character of monarch as in his quality of chief of the
feudal system. He was not reproached with having violated the laws; but
the nation wished to emancipate and re-constitute itself.

"In England, if Charles I. had yielded voluntarily, if he had possessed
the moderate and undecided character of Louis XVI. he would have
survived.

"In France, on the contrary, if Louis XVI. had openly resisted, if he
had had the courage, activity, and ardour of Charles I. he would have
triumphed.

"During the whole conflict, Charles I., isolated in his kingdom, was
surrounded only by partisans and friends, and was never connected with
any constitutional branch of his subjects.

"Louis XVI. was supported by a regular army, by foreign aid, and two
constitutional portions of the nation—the nobility and the clergy.
Besides, there remained to Louis XVI. a second decisive resolution,
which Charles I. had it not in his power to adopt, namely, that of
ceasing to be a _feudal Chief_, in order to become a _national Chief_.
Unfortunately he could not decide on either the one or the other.

"Charles I. therefore perished because he resisted, and Louis XVI.
because he did not resist. The one had a perfect conviction of the
privileges of his prerogative; but it is doubtful whether the other had
any such conviction, any more than he felt the necessity of exercising
its privileges.

"In England, the death of Charles I. was the result of the artful and
atrocious ambition of a single man.

"In France, it was the work of the blind multitude, of a disorderly
popular assembly.

"In England, the representatives of the people evinced a slight shade of
decorum, by abstaining from being the judges and actors in the murder
which they decreed; they appointed a tribunal to try the King.

"In France, the representatives of the people presumed to be at once
accusers, judges, and executioners.

"In England, the affair was managed by an invisible hand: it assumed an
appearance of reflection and calmness. In France, it was managed by the
multitude, whose fury was without bounds.

"In England, the death of the King gave birth to the Republic. In
France, on the contrary, the birth of the Republic caused the death of
the King.

"In England the political explosion was produced by the efforts of the
most ardent religious fanaticism. In France, it was brought about amidst
the acclamations of cynical impiety; each according to different ages
and manners.

"The English Revolution was ushered in by the excesses of the gloomy
school of Calvin. The loose doctrines of the modern school conjured up
the storm in France.

"In England, the Revolution was mingled with civil war. In France, it
was attended by foreign war; and to the efforts and opposition of
foreigners the French may justly attribute their excesses. The English
can advance no such excuse for theirs.

"In England, the army proved itself capable of every act of outrage and
fury; it was the scourge of the citizens.

"In France, on the contrary, we owed every benefit to the army. Its
triumphs abroad either diminished, or caused us to forget, our horrors
at home. The army secured independence and glory to France.

"In England, the Restoration was the work of the English people, who
hailed the event with the most lively enthusiasm. The nation escaped
slavery, and seemed to have recovered freedom. It was not precisely thus
in France.

"In England, a son-in-law hurled his father-in-law from the throne. He
was supported by all Europe; and the memory of the act is revered and
imperishable.

“In France, on the contrary, the chosen sovereign of the people, who had
reigned for the space of fifteen years, with the assent of his subjects
and foreigners, re-appeared on the theatre of the world, to seize a
sceptre which he regarded as his own. Europe rose in a mass, and
outlawed him. Eleven hundred thousand men marched against him; he
yielded; he was thrown into captivity, and now efforts are making to
tarnish the lustre of his memory!”

EXPLANATION WITH DR. O’MEARA.—THE CONSULATE.—OPINION OF THE EMIGRANTS
  RESPECTING THE CONSUL.—THE EMPEROR’S INTENTIONS WITH REGARD TO
  EMIGRANT PROPERTY.—CONCURRENCE OF FORTUNATE CIRCUMSTANCES IN THE
  EMPEROR’S CAREER.—OPINION OF THE ITALIANS RESPECTING NAPOLEON.—HIS
  CORONATION BY THE POPE.—EFFECT OF THE CONFERENCES AT TILSIT.—THE
  SPANISH BOURBONS.—ARRIVAL OF THE FAMOUS WOODEN PALACE.

6th.—The Emperor sent for me at nine o’clock. He was vexed at the
conduct of the new Governor, and particularly at the intention that
seemed to be entertained of violating his last humble sanctuary. He
preferred death to this last outrage; and he was resolved to run every
risk in opposing it. A catastrophe seemed inevitable. The Emperor indeed
concluded that there was a determination to bring it about, and that
only some plausible pretence was sought for. He was resolved not to
evade it. “I am prepared for every thing,” said he, in a certain moment
of confidence. “They will kill me here, it is certain....”

The Emperor sent for Dr. O’Meara, in order that he might learn his
personal opinion. He desired me to express to him, in English, that he
had hitherto no cause of complaint against him: on the contrary, that he
considered him to be an honest man, and as a proof of this, he would
rely implicitly on the answers he might receive to the questions which
he was about to put to him. It was necessary, he said, to come to an
understanding. Was he to consider him as his own physician personally,
or merely as a prison doctor, appointed by the English Government? Was
he his confessor or his inspector? Had he made reports respecting him,
or was it his intention so to do, if called upon? In the one case, the
Emperor said he would readily continue to receive his attendance, and
was grateful for the services he had already received; in the other
case, he thanked him and begged him to discontinue his visits.

The doctor replied with great firmness, and in a tone of feeling. He
said that his appointment was entirely professional, and had no
connection with politics; he conceived himself to be the Emperor’s
personal medical attendant, and was a stranger to every other
consideration; that he had made no report respecting the Emperor, and
that none had yet been demanded of him; that he could not imagine any
circumstance which should induce him to make a report, except in case of
serious illness, when it might be necessary to call in the aid of other
professional men.

About three o’clock, the Emperor went into the garden with the intention
of mounting his horse. He had been dictating for a considerable time to
General Gourgaud, and had nearly got through the events of 1815. He was
very well satisfied with the result of his labour.

I recommended to him next to commence the history of the Consulate; that
brilliant period in which a nation in a state of dissolution was in a
few moments magically re-composed, with respect to its laws, religion,
morality, true principles, and honest prejudices; and all this amidst
the universal applause and admiration of astonished Europe.

I was in England at this time. I told the Emperor that the mass of the
emigrants were forcibly struck by these acts. The recal of the priests
and of the emigrants was received as a blessing; and the great majority
profited by it.

The Emperor asked me whether we had not been shocked at the word
amnesty?—"No," I replied, “we knew all the difficulties which the First
Consul had experienced in this respect. We knew that all the advantages
of the measure were due to him, that he alone was our protector, and
that every evil originated with those with whom he had been obliged to
contend in our favour. Subsequently,” added I, “on our return to France,
we found indeed that the Consul might have treated us better with
respect to our property, and this without much difficulty, merely by
assuming a silent and passive attitude. This we conceived would have
sufficed in every case to have produced amicable arrangements between
the old proprietors and the purchasers.”

“Doubtless, I might have done so,” said the Emperor, “but could I have
trusted sufficiently to the emigrants?—Answer me this question.”

“Sire,” I replied, “now that I have more knowledge of public affairs,
and take a more comprehensive view of things, I can readily conceive
that policy required you to act as you did. Recent circumstances have
proved how wise was the course which you pursued. It would have been bad
policy to have dissatisfied the nation. The question of national
property is one of the first bulwarks of public spirit and of the
national party.”

“You are right,” observed the Emperor; "but I might nevertheless have
granted all that was wished. For a moment I cherished the idea of doing
so, and I committed a fault in not fulfilling this idea. I intended to
form a mass, or a _syndicate_, of all the unsold property of the
emigrants, and, on their return, to distribute it in a proportional
ratio among them. But when I came to grant property to individuals, I
soon found that I was creating too many wealthy men, and that they
repaid my favours with insolence. Those who, by dint of petitioning and
cringing, had perhaps obtained an annual income of 50 or 100,000 crowns,
no longer lifted their hats to me; and far from evincing the least
gratitude, they had the impertinence to pretend that they had paid
secretly for the favours they enjoyed. This was the conduct of the whole
Faubourg Saint-Germain. I restored the fortunes of these people, and
they still remained no less hostile and anti-national. Then, in spite of
the act of amnesty, I prohibited the restitution of the unsold forests,
whenever they should exceed a certain value. This was doubtless an act
of injustice, according to the letter of the law; but policy
imperatively called for it: the fault was in the drawing up of the law,
and the improvidence which dictated it. This re-action on my part,
destroyed all the good effect of the recal of the emigrants, and robbed
me of the attachment of all the great families. I might have guarded
against this evil, or I might have neutralized its effects by my
syndicate. For one great family alienated, I might have secured the
attachment of a hundred provincial nobles, and thus I should in reality
have strictly conformed with justice, which required that the emigrants,
who had all run the same risk, embarked their fortunes in common on
board the same ship, suffered the same wreck, and incurred the same
punishment, should all receive the same indemnification. Here I
committed an error,” said the Emperor, “which the more unpardonable as I
entertained an idea of the plan which I have just mentioned. But I stood
alone, and was surrounded by opposition and difficulty. All parties were
hostile to the emigrants: and meanwhile I was pressed by important
affairs, time was running on, and I was compelled to direct my attention
to other matters.

“Even so late as my return from Elba,” continued the Emperor, “I was on
the point of executing a project of the same sort. If I had had time, I
should have turned my attention to the poor emigrants from the provinces
who were neglected by the Court. It is rather a singular circumstance
that this idea was suggested to me by an old ex-minister of Louis XVI.,
whose services had been but ill requited by the Princes, and who pointed
out to me various plans by which evils of the same kind might have been
advantageously remedied.”

“Sire,” observed I, “the reasonable portion of the emigrants well knew
that the few generous and liberal ideas that were cherished with respect
to them originated only with you; they were aware that all who
surrounded you wished for their destruction. They knew that the very
idea of nobility was hateful to them; and they gave you credit for not
being of that opinion. Would you believe it, their self-love
occasionally found a certain degree of consolation in the reflection
that you were one of their own class?”

The Emperor then asked me what was the opinion of the emigrants
respecting his birth, the incidents of his life, &c. I replied that we
beheld him for the first time at the head of the army of Italy; and that
we were totally ignorant of all his previous history. We never could
call him _de Buonaparte_. At this the Emperor laughed. The turn of our
conversation then led him to observe that he had frequently reflected on
the singular concurrence of secondary circumstances which had brought
about his wonderful career.

1st, “If,” said he, “my father, who died before he attained the age of
forty, had survived some time longer, he would have been appointed
deputy from the Corsican nobility to the Constituent Assembly. He was
much attached to the nobility and the aristocracy; on the other hand, he
was a warm partisan of generous and liberal ideas. He would, therefore,
either have been entirely on the right side, or at least in the minority
of the nobility. At any rate, whatever might have been my own personal
opinions, I should have followed my father’s footsteps, and thus my
career would have been entirely deranged and lost.

2ndly, “If I had been older at the time of the revolution, I should
perhaps myself have been appointed deputy. Being of an enthusiastic
disposition, I should infallibly have adopted some opinion, and ardently
followed it up. But at all events I should have shut myself out from the
military service, and thus again my career would have been changed.

3rdly, “Had my family been better known, more wealthy, or more
distinguished, my rank of nobility, even though I had followed the
course of the revolution, would have made a cipher of me and proscribed
me. I could never have obtained confidence; I could never have commanded
an army; or, if I had attained such a command, I could not have ventured
to do all that I did. Had my family circumstances been different from
what they actually were, I could not, with all my success, have followed
the bent of my liberal ideas with regard to the priests and nobles, and
I should never have arrived at the head of the Government.

4thly, “The number of my sisters and brothers is also a circumstance
which proved of great use to me, by multiplying my connections and means
of influence.

5thly, “My marriage with Madame de Beauharnois brought me in contact
with a party, whose aid was necessary in my system of amalgamations,
which was one of the chief principles of my government, and that by
which it was especially characterized. But for my wife, I should not
have obtained any natural connection with this party.

6thly, “Even my foreign origin, though in France an endeavour was made
to raise an outcry against it, was not unattended by advantage. The
Italians regarded me as their countryman, and this circumstance greatly
facilitated my success in Italy. This success being once obtained,
inquiries were set on foot respecting our family history, which had long
been buried in obscurity. My family was acknowledged by the Italians to
have acted a distinguished part in the events of their country. It was
viewed by them as an Italian family. Thus when the question of my sister
Pauline’s marriage with the Prince Borghese was agitated, there was but
one voice in Rome and Tuscany among the members of that family and their
adherents: ‘Well,’ said they, ‘the union is among ourselves; they are
our own connections.’ Subsequently, when it was proposed that the
Emperor should be crowned by the Pope at Paris, great obstacles were, as
circumstances have since proved, thrown in the way of that important
event. The Austrian party in the conclave violently opposed the measure;
but the Italian party decided in its favour, by adding to political
considerations a little consideration of national self-love. ‘We are
placing,’ said they, ‘an Italian family on the throne, to govern these
barbarians: we shall thus be revenged on the Gauls.’”

These remarks naturally led the Emperor to speak of the Pope, who he
said was rather favourably disposed towards him. The Pope did not accuse
Napoleon of having ordered his removal to France. He was very indignant
at reading in certain publications that the Emperor treated him with
disrespect. He had received at Fontainebleau every mark of consideration
that he could wish. When he learned the Emperor’s return from Elba to
France, he said to Lucien, in a tone expressive of his confidence and
impartiality, _’E sbarcato e arrivato_ (he has landed, he has arrived.)
He afterwards said: “You are going to Paris; make my peace with him. I
am in Rome; no cause of difference shall arise between us.”

“It is certain,” said the Emperor, “that Rome will afford a natural and
favourable asylum for my family: there they may find themselves at home.
Finally,” added he, smiling, “even my name, Napoleon, which in Italy is
uncommon, poetic, and sonorous, contributed its share in the great
circumstances of my life.”

I mentioned to the Emperor, what I had already remarked, namely, that
the great mass of the emigrants were far from being unjust to him. The
sensible part of the old aristocracy disliked him, it is true, but only
because he proved an obstacle to their views. They knew how to
appreciate his achievements and his talents, which they admired in spite
of their inclination. Even the fanatics acknowledged that he had but one
fault: “Why is he not legitimate?” they were frequently heard to say.
Austerlitz staggered us, though it did not subdue us; but Tilsit
prostrated every thing. “Your Majesty,” said I, “might yourself have
judged of this, and have enjoyed on your return the unanimity of homage,
acclamation, and good wishes.”

“That is to say,” observed the Emperor, smiling, “if, at that time, I
could or would have indulged in repose and pleasure; if I had resigned
myself to indolence, if every thing had resumed its old course, you
would have adored me? But if such had been my taste and inclination, and
certainly nothing was more opposite to my natural disposition,
circumstances would not have permitted me to act as I pleased.”

The Emperor then adverted to the numerous difficulties by which he had
been incessantly surrounded and controlled; and, alluding to the Spanish
war, he said, “That unlucky war ruined me; it divided my forces, obliged
me to multiply my efforts, and caused my principles to be assailed: and
yet it was impossible to leave the Peninsula a prey to the machinations
of the English, the intrigues, the hopes, and the pretensions of the
Bourbons. Besides, the Spanish Bourbons were not calculated to inspire
much fear. Nationally they were foreign to us, and we to them. At the
castle of Marrach, and at the Bayonne, I observed that Charles IV. the
Queen knew no difference between Madame de Montmorency and the new
ladies: the names of the latter were indeed rendered more familiar to
them by the newspapers and public documents. The Empress Josephine, who
had the most delicate tact on matters of this sort, never ceased
alluding to the circumstance. The Spanish Royal Family implored me to
adopt a daughter, and to create her a Princess of the Asturias. They
pointed out Mademoiselle de Tascher, afterwards Duchess of Aremberg; but
I had personal reasons for objecting to this choice. For a moment I
decided on Mademoiselle de la Rochefoucault, afterwards Princess
Aldobrandini; but I wanted some one sincerely devoted to my interests, a
true Frenchwoman, possessing talent and information, and I could not fix
on one endowed with all the qualities I wished for.”

Then returning to the war in Spain, the Emperor resumed:—"This
combination ruined me. All the circumstances of my disasters are
connected with that fatal knot: it destroyed my moral power in Europe,
rendered my embarrassments more complicated, and opened a school for the
English soldiers. It was I who trained the English army in the
Peninsula.

"Events have proved that I committed a great fault in the choice of my
means; for the fault lies in the means much more than in the principles.
It cannot be doubted that, in the crisis in which France then was, in
the struggle of new ideas, in the great cause of the age against the
rest of Europe, we could not leave Spain behind, at the disposal of our
enemies: it was absolutely necessary to enchain her, voluntarily, or by
force, in our system. The destiny of France required this: and the code
of the welfare of nations is not always that of individuals. Besides, to
political necessity was here superadded for me the force of right.
Spain, when she saw me in danger, Spain, when she knew that my hands
were full at Jena, had almost declared war against me. The insult ought
not to pass unpunished: I could declare war in my turn, and assuredly
the success could not be doubtful. It was this very facility that misled
me. The nation despised its government: it called loudly for a
regeneration. From the height to which Fortune had raised me, I
considered myself called, I considered it worthy of me to accomplish in
peace so great an event. I was solicitous to spare blood, that not a
drop should stain the Castilian emancipation. I therefore delivered the
Spaniards from their abominable institutions; I gave them a liberal
constitution; I deemed it necessary, perhaps too lightly, to change
their dynasty. I placed one of my brothers at their head; but he was the
only foreigner among them. I respected the integrity of their territory,
their independence, their manners, the remnant of their laws. The new
monarch gained the capital, having no other ministers, no other
councillors, no other courtiers, but those of the late Court. My troops
were about to withdraw: I had done the greatest benefit that ever was
conferred on a nation—so I said to myself, and so I still say. The
Spaniards themselves, as I have been assured, thought so in their
hearts, and never complained of any thing but the forms. I expected
their blessings, but I was disappointed: disdaining interest, they
thought only of the insult: they were indignant at the idea of an
affront, enraged at the sight of force, and all flew to arms. The
Spaniards, collectively, behaved like men of honour. I have nothing to
say on that head: but, if they triumphed, they have been cruelly
punished for it. Perhaps they are to be pitied.... They deserved
better."

The Emperor dined with us to-day; it was long since we had enjoyed his
company. After dinner he read to us Florian’s novel of Claudine, and
some extracts from Paul and Virginia, a work which he says he is very
fond of, on account of early recollections.

The Adamant transport has arrived. This vessel a short time ago missed
the island. She formed part of a convoy, the remainder of which arrived
nearly a month back. These ships brought the famous wooden palace,
accounts of which have filled all the newspapers in England, and
probably in Europe; and also the furniture, about which the papers have
also made a great parade. The wooden palace proved to be nothing more
than a number of rough planks, which no one knows how to put together at
St. Helena, and which it would require several years to fit up. The
splendour of the other articles was of course well suited to our
situation. Ostentation, pomp, and luxury, were for Europe; truth and
wretchedness for St. Helena.

                           THE ILIAD.—HOMER.

7th.—The Governor came to Longwood about four o’clock, and went over the
establishment without asking to see any one. His ill-humour was visibly
increased, his manners had become fierce and brutal.

About five o’clock the Emperor sent for me; the Grand Marshal had been
with him for some time. When he went away, the Emperor began to talk
with me upon literature; and we reviewed almost every epic poem, ancient
and modern. When conversing on the Iliad, he took up an edition of
Homer, and read aloud several cantos. The Emperor greatly admired the
Iliad. “It was,” he said, "like the Books of Moses, the token and the
pledge of the age in which it was produced. Homer, in his epic poem, has
proved himself a poet, an orator, an historian, a legislator, a
geographer, and a theologist. He may be justly called the encyclopedist
of the period in which he flourished.”

The Emperor considered Homer inimitable. Father Hardouin had ventured to
question the authenticity of of the Iliad, and to attribute that sacred
monument of antiquity to a monk of the tenth century. This the Emperor
said was perfect absurdity. He added that he had never been so struck
with the beauties of the Iliad as at that very moment; and that the
sensations with which it then inspired him fully convinced him of the
justice of the universal approbation bestowed on it. One thing which
particularly struck him, he observed, was the combination of rudeness of
manners with refinement of ideas. Heroes were described killing animals
for their food, cooking their meat with their own hands, and yet
delivering speeches distinguished for singular eloquence and denoting a
high degree of civilization.

The Emperor desired me to stay and dine with him. “Yet,” said he, “you
would probably fare better at the table of the household; you will be
starved with me.” “Sire,” I replied, “I know that you are ill provided;
but I prefer privation shared with you to luxury enjoyed elsewhere.”

During the day, the Emperor was ill with the head-ache, of which some
individuals of his suite also complained. I regretted that he was unable
to go out, for the weather was very fine. After dinner, the Emperor
summoned the whole of his suite into his own chamber, and we remained
with him until ten o’clock.

8th.—About five o’clock the Emperor took an airing in the calash. On his
return he was visited by several English gentlemen, of whom, according
to custom, he asked a multitude of questions. These gentlemen had
arrived by the Cornwall: they were proceeding to China, and were
expected to touch at St. Helena in the following January on their
passage back to Europe.

After dinner one of the suite remarked to the Emperor that his feelings
had been painfully excited in the morning when writing out a fair copy
of his dictation respecting the battle of Waterloo, to find that the
result had depended, as it were, on a hair. The Emperor made no reply,
but, turning to Emmanuel, said, in a tone expressing deep emotion: “_My
son_ (which was his usual mode of addressing him) go and get Iphigenia
in Aulis, it will be a more pleasing subject.” He then read to us that
beautiful drama, which he admires exceedingly.

              CHARACTERISTIC REMARKS MADE BY THE EMPEROR.

9th.—I went to dine at Briars with my son and General Gourgaud; and we
staid to a little ball. I met the Admiral there, and I never found him
in a more agreeable humour. This was the first time I had seen him since
the adventure of Noverraz; I was aware how much the circumstance had
hurt him. He was on the point of departing for Europe, and I knew the
Emperor’s sentiments. I was twenty times almost tempted freely to enter
upon the subject, and thus to be the means of reconciling him with
Napoleon. Truth, justice, and our own interest, demanded this; but I was
deterred by considerations that were doubtless trivial. How often have I
blamed myself since!... But I had not received this delicate mission,
and I could not venture to take it upon myself. The admiral might have
given publicity to the affair, and perhaps have represented it in a way
that would have highly displeased the Emperor, and possibly have exposed
him to fresh vexations. On this subject I will note down the following
remarks which were made by the Emperor, and which characterize him too
well to be omitted.

He was one day describing to me evils attendant on weakness and
credulity in a sovereign; the intrigues which they engender in the
interior of the palace; and the fickleness which they create. He
demonstrated very clearly that a sovereign distinguished for these
qualities must inevitably become the dupe of courtiers and the victim of
calumny. “Of this I will give you a proof,” said he. “You yourself, who
have sacrificed every thing to follow me; you, who have evinced such
noble and affecting devotedness, how do you think your conduct is
viewed? How do you imagine your character is estimated? You are regarded
merely as one of the old nobility, an emigrant, an agent of the
Bourbons, maintaining correspondence with the English. It is said that
you concurred in betraying me to them, and that you followed me hither
only to be a spy upon me and to sell me to my enemies. The aversion and
animosity which you evince towards the Governor are affirmed to be only
false appearances agreed upon between you for the purpose of disguising
your treachery.” When I smiled at the lively turn of his fancy, and the
volubility with which he expressed himself: “You may laugh,” resumed he
“but I assure you that I am not inventing, I am merely echoing the
reports that have reached my ears. And can you imagine,” continued he,
“that a silly, feeble, and credulous being would not be influenced by
such stories and contrivances? My dear Las Cases, if I had not been
superior to the majority of legitimates, I might already have been
deprived of your services here, and your upright heart would perhaps
have been doomed to suffer the cruel stings of ingratitude.” He
concluded by saying: “how wretched is the lot of man! He is the same
every where: on the summit of a rock or within the walls of a palace!
Man is always man!...”

              REMARKS ON HOCHE AND VARIOUS OTHER GENERALS.

10th.—The weather was very bad, and the Emperor, finding it impossible
to go out, walked up and down in the dining-room. He afterwards ordered
a fire to be kindled in the drawing-room, and sat down to play at chess
with the Grand Marshal. After dinner he read to us the history of Joseph
from the Bible, and the Andromache of Racine.

The Bengal fleet arrived yesterday evening. The Countess of Loudon and
Moira, the wife of the Governor-General of India, was among the
passengers.

To-day, in the course of conversation, the name of Hoche having been
mentioned, some one observed that at a very early age he had inspired
great hope. “And what is still better,” said the Emperor, “you may add
that he fulfilled that hope.” Hoche and Napoleon had seen each other,
and had conversed twice or thrice together. Hoche esteemed him even to
admiration. Napoleon did not hesitate to say that he possessed over
Hoche the advantages of extensive information and the principles of a
good education. There was, he said, in other respects a great difference
between them. “Hoche,” said he, “endeavoured to raise a party for
himself, and gained only servile adherents. For my part, I had created
for myself an immense number of partisans, without in any way seeking
popularity. Hoche possessed a hostile provoking kind of ambition; he was
the sort of man who could conceive the idea of coming from Strasburg,
with 25,000 men, to seize the reins of government by force. But my
policy was always of a patient kind, led on by the spirit of the age,
and the circumstances of the moment.”

The Emperor added that Hoche would ultimately either have yielded to
him, or must have subdued him, and, as he was fond of money and
pleasure, he doubted not that he would have yielded to him. Moreau,
observed he, in similar circumstances, knew not how to decide. Thus
Napoleon attached but little importance to him, and regarded him as
totally wanting in ability; without however extending this opinion to
his military talent. “But he was a weak man,” said the Emperor, "guided
by those who surrounded him, and slavishly subject to the control of his
wife: he was a general of the old monarchy.

“Hoche,” continued the Emperor, "died suddenly and under singular
circumstances; and as there existed a party who seemed to think that all
crimes belonged to me of right, endeavours were made to circulate a
report that I had poisoned him. There was a time when no mischief could
happen that was not imputed to me; thus, when in Paris, I caused Kleber
to be assassinated in Egypt; I blew out Desaix’s brains at Marengo: I
strangled and cut the throats of persons who were confined in prisons; I
seized the Pope by the hair of his head: and a hundred similar
absurdities were affirmed. However, as I paid not the least attention to
all this, the fashion passed away, and I do not see that my successors
have been very eager to revive it; and yet, if any of the crimes imputed
to me had had any real existence, the documents, the perpetrators, the
accomplices, &c. might have been brought forward.

“However, such is the influence of report that these stories, however
absurd, were credited by the vulgar, and are perhaps still believed by a
numerous class of persons. Happily the statements of the historian who
reasons are divested of this pernicious effect.”

Then, returning to the former topic of conversation, he said, "What a
number of great Generals arose suddenly during the revolution: Pichegru,
Kleber, Massena, Marceau, Desaix, Hoche, &c., and almost all were
originally private soldiers. But here the efforts of nature seem to have
been exhausted; for she has produced nothing since, or at least nothing
so great. At that period every thing was submitted to competition among
thirty millions of men, and nature necessarily asserted her rights:
whereas, subsequently, we were again confined within the narrower limits
of order and the forms of society. I was even accused of having
surrounded myself, in military and civil posts, with men of inferior
ability, the better to display my own superiority. But now, when the
competition will not certainly be renewed, it remains for those who are
in power to make a better selection. We shall see what they will do.

"Another circumstance, not less remarkable, was the extreme youth of
some of these Generals, who seemed to have started ready made from the
hands of nature. Their characters were perfectly suited to the
circumstances in which they were placed, with the exception of Hoche,
whose morals were by no means pure. The others had no object in view
save _glory_ and _patriotism_, which formed their whole circle. They
were men after the antique model.

"Desaix was surnamed by the Arabs the _Just Sultan_; at the funeral of
Marceau, the Austrians observed an armistice, on account of the respect
they entertained for him: and young Duphot was the emblem of perfect
virtue.

"But the same commendations cannot be bestowed on those who were farther
advanced in life: for they belonged in some measure to the era that had
just passed away. Massena, Augereau, Brune, and many others, were merely
intrepid plunderers. Massena was, moreover, distinguished for the most
sordid avarice. It was asserted that I played him a trick which might
have proved a hanging matter; that, being one day indignant at his last
depredations, I drew on his banker for 2 or 3,000,000. Great
embarrassment ensued: for my name was not without its weight. The banker
wrote to intimate that he could not pay the sum without the authority of
Massena. On the other hand, he was urged to pay it without hesitation,
as Massena, if he were wronged, could appeal to the courts of law for
justice. Massena however resorted to no legal measures, and suffered the
money to be paid.

"O ——, Murat, and Ney, were common-place Generals, having no
recommendation but personal courage.

"Moncey was an honest man: Macdonald was distinguished for firm
integrity; I was deceived with respect to the character of B——.

"S—— also had his faults as well as his merits. The whole of his
campaign in the south of France was admirably conducted. It will
scarcely be credited that this man, whose deportment and manners denoted
a lofty character, was the slave of his wife. When I learned at Dresden
our defeat at Vittoria, and the loss of all Spain through the
mismanagement of poor Joseph, whose plans and measures were not suited
to the present age, and seemed rather to belong to a Soubise than to me,
I looked about for some one capable of repairing these disasters, and I
cast my eyes on S—— who was near me. He said that he was ready to
undertake what I wished; but entreated that I would speak to his wife,
by whom, he said, he expected to be reproached. I desired him to send
her to me. She assumed an air of hostility, and decidedly told me that
her husband should certainly not return to Spain; that he had already
performed important services, and was now entitled to a little repose.
‘Madam,’ said I to her: ‘I did not send for you with the view of
enduring your scolding. I am not your husband, and if I were I should
not be the more inclined to bear with you.’ These few words confounded
her; she became as pliant as a glove, turned quite obsequious, and was
only eager to obtain a few conditions. To these, however, I by no means
acceded, and merely contented myself with congratulating her on her
willingness to listen to reason. In critical circumstances, Madam, said
I, it is a wife’s duty to endeavour to smooth difficulties; go home to
your husband, and do not torment him by your opposition."

             RIDICULOUS INVITATION SENT BY SIR HUDSON LOWE.

11th.—At four o’clock I attended the Emperor. The Grand Marshal entered
the room, and gave him a note. The Emperor, after glancing it over,
returned it, shrugging up his shoulders and saying: “This is too absurd!
There is no answer; give it to Las Cases.”

Will it be credited? This was a note from the Governor to the Grand
Marshal, inviting _General Bonaparte_ to dine at Plantation House to
meet Lady Loudon, the wife of Lord Moria. I blushed at the indecorum.
Could any thing be more ridiculous. Sir Hudson Lowe doubtless thought
the thing perfectly natural; and yet he had resided for a long time at
the head-quarters of armies on the Continent; and taken part in the
diplomatic transactions of the time!!...

Mr. Skelton, the Deputy-Governor of the island, who was about to depart
for Europe, came accompanied by his wife, to take leave of the Emperor.
They staid to dine at Longwood.

This worthy family, whom, contrary to our inclination, we had removed
from Longwood, whose prospects we had overthrown by the suppression of
the post of Deputy-Governor on our arrival—this excellent family, to
whom we had been the occasion of real personal injury, is, however, the
only one in the island from whom we have experienced invariable respect
and politeness. We therefore bade them adieu with sincere wishes for
their welfare. We shall always remember them with sentiments of the
deepest interest.

NAPOLEON AT THE INSTITUTE.—AT THE COUNCIL OF STATE.—THE CIVIL
  CODE.—MESSAGE TO LORD ST. VINCENT.—ON THE INTERIOR OF AFRICA.—THE
  MARINE DEPARTMENT.—DECRÉS.

12th.—The Emperor, while walking in the garden and discoursing on
various subjects, spoke of the Institute, the manner in which it was
composed, the spirit of its members, &c. When he took his place in the
Institute, on his return from the army of Italy, he said that he might
consider himself as the tenth member in his class, which consisted of
about fifty.

Lagrange, Laplace, and Monge, were at the head of this class. It was
rather a remarkable circumstance, and one which attracted considerable
notice at the time, to see the young General of the army of Italy take
his place in the Institute, and publicly discuss profound metaphysical
subjects with his colleagues. He was then called the _Geometrician_ of
battles, and _Mechanician_ of victory, &c.

On becoming First Consul, Napoleon caused no less sensation in the
Council of State. He constantly presided at the sittings for drawing up
the civil code. “Tronchet,” he said, “was the soul of this code, and he,
Napoleon, was its demonstrator.” Tronchet was gifted with a singularly
profound and correct understanding; but he could not descend to
developments. He spoke badly, and could not defend what he proposed.
“The whole council,” said the Emperor, “at first opposed his
suggestions;” but Napoleon, with his shrewdness and facility of seizing
and creating luminous and new relations, arose, and without any other
knowledge of the subject than the correct basis furnished by Tronchet,
developed his ideas, set aside objections, and brought every one over to
his opinions.

The Minutes of the Council of State have transmitted to us the extempore
speeches of the First Consul on most of the articles of the civil code.
At every line, we are struck with the correctness of his observations,
the depth of his views, and in particular the liberality of his
sentiments.

Thus, in spite of the opposition that was set up to it, we are indebted
to him for that article of the Code which enacts that every individual
born in France is a Frenchman. “I should like to know,” said he, "what
inconvenience can possibly arise from acknowledging every man born in
France to be a Frenchman? The extension of the French civil laws can
only be attended by advantageous consequences; thus instead of ordaining
that individuals born in France of a foreign father shall obtain civil
privileges only when they declare themselves willing to enjoy them, it
may be decreed that they will be deprived of those privileges only when
they formally renounce them.

"If individuals born in France of a foreign father were not to be
considered as enjoying the full privileges of Frenchmen, we cannot
subject to the conscription and other public duties the sons of those
foreigners who have married in France through the events of the war.

“I am of opinion that the question should be considered only with
reference to the interests of France. Though individuals born in France
possess no property, they are at least animated by French spirit, and
they follow French customs. They cherish that attachment which every one
naturally feels for the country that gave him birth; finally, they help
to maintain the public burthens.”

The First Consul distinguished himself no less by his support of the
article which preserves the privileges of Frenchmen to children born of
Frenchmen settled in foreign countries, and this law he extended in
spite of powerful opposition. “The French people,” said he, "who are a
numerous and industrious people, are scattered over every part of the
world; and in course of time they will be scattered about in still
greater numbers. But the French visit foreign countries only to make
their fortunes. The acts by which they seem momentarily to attach
themselves to foreign governments have for their object only to obtain
the protection necessary for their various speculations. If they should
intend to return to France, after realizing a fortune, would it be
proper to exclude them?

“If it should happen that a country in the possession of France were to
be invaded by the enemy, and afterwards ceded to him by a treaty, would
it be just to say to those of the inhabitants who might come to settle
on the territory of the republic, that they had forfeited their rights
as Frenchmen, for not having quitted their former country at the moment
it was ceded; and because they had sworn temporary allegiance to a new
Sovereign, in order to gain time to dispose of their property and
transfer their wealth to France?”

In another debate on the decease of soldiers, some difficulties having
arisen relative to those who might die in a foreign country, the First
Consul exclaimed with vivacity;—"The soldier is never abroad when he is
under the national banner. The spot where the standard of France is
unfurled becomes French ground!"

On the subject of divorce, the First Consul was for the adoption of the
principle, and spoke at great length on the ground of incompatibility,
which it was attempted to repel.

“It is pretended,” said he, "that divorce is contrary to the interests
of women and children, and to the spirit of families; but nothing is
more at variance with the interests of married persons, when their
humours are incompatible, than to reduce them to the alternative of
either living together, or of separating with publicity. Nothing is more
opposite to domestic happiness than a divided family. Separation had
formerly, with regard to the wife, the husband, and the children, nearly
the same effect as divorce, and yet it was not so frequent as divorce
now is. It was only attended with this additional inconvenience, that a
woman of bad character might continue to dishonour her husband’s name
because she was permitted to retain it."

When opposing the drawing up of an article to specify the causes for
which divorce would be admissible, he said; "But is it not a great
misfortune to be compelled to expose these causes, and reveal even the
most minute and private family details?

“Besides, will these causes, even in the event of their real existence,
be always sufficient to obtain divorce? That of adultery, for instance,
can only be successfully maintained by proofs, which it is always very
difficult, and sometimes even impossible, to produce. Yet the husband,
who should not be able to bring forward these proofs, would be compelled
to live with a woman whom he abhors and despises, and who introduces
illegitimate children into his family. His only resource would be
separation from bed and board; but this would not shield his name from
dishonour.”

Resuming the support of the principle of divorce, and opposing certain
restrictions, he continued; "Marriage is not always, as is supposed, the
result of affection. A young female consents to marry for the sake of
conforming to the fashion, and obtaining independence and an
establishment of her own. She accepts a husband of a disproportionate
age, and whose tastes and habits do not accord with hers. The law then
should provide for her a resource against the moment when, the illusion
having ceased, she finds that she is united in ill-assorted bonds, and
that her expectations have been disappointed.

"Marriage takes its form from the manners, customs, and religion, of
every people. Thus its forms are not everywhere alike. In some
countries, wives and concubines live under the same roof; and slaves are
treated like children: the organization of families is therefore not
deduced from the law of nature. The marriages of the Romans were not
like those of the French.

"The precautions established by law for preventing persons from
contracting unthinkingly at the age of fifteen or eighteen an engagement
which extends to the whole of their lives, are certainly wise. But are
they sufficient?

"That after ten years passed in wedlock, divorce should not be admitted
but for very weighty reasons, is also a proper regulation. Since,
however, marriages contracted in early youth are rarely the choice of
the parties themselves, but are brought about by their families for
interested views, it is proper that, if the parties themselves perceive
that they are not formed for one another, they should be enabled to
dissolve a union on which they had no opportunity of reflecting. The
facility thus afforded them, however, should not tend to favour either
levity or passion. It should be surrounded by every precaution and every
form calculated to prevent its abuse. The parties, for example, might be
heard by a secret family council, held under the presidency of the
magistrate. In addition to this, it might, if thought necessary, be
determined that a woman should only once be allowed to procure divorce,
and that she should not be suffered to re-marry in less than five years,
lest the idea of a second marriage should induce her to dissolve the
first; that, after married persons have lived together for ten years,
the dissolution should be rendered very difficult, &c.

“To grant divorce only on account of adultery publicly proved, is to
proscribe it completely; for, on the one hand, few cases of adultery can
be proved, and, on the other, there are few men shameless enough to
expose the infamy of their wives. Besides, it would be scandalous, and
contrary to the honour of the nation, to reveal the scenes that pass in
some families; it might be concluded, though erroneously, that they
afford a picture of our French manners.”

The first lawyers of the council were of opinion that civil death should
carry along with it the dissolution of the civil contract of marriage.
The question was warmly discussed. The First Consul, with great
animation, opposed it in these terms; "A woman is then to be forbidden,
though fully convinced of her husband’s innocence, to follow in exile
the man to whom she is most tenderly united; or, if she should yield to
her conviction, and to her duty, she is to be regarded only as a
concubine! Why deprive an unfortunate married couple of the right of
living together under the honourable title of lawful husband and wife?

"If the law permits a woman to follow her husband, without allowing her
the title of wife, it permits adultery.

"Society is sufficiently avenged by the sentence of condemnation, when
the criminal is deprived of his property and torn from his friends and
his connections. Is there any need to extend the punishment to the wife,
and violently to dissolve a union which identifies her existence with
that of her husband? Would she not say:—‘You had better have taken his
life, I should then have been permitted at least to cherish his memory;
but you ordain that he shall live, and you will not allow me to console
him in his misery.’ Alas! how many men have been led into guilt only
through their attachment to their wives! Those therefore who have caused
their misfortunes should at least be permitted to share them. If a woman
fulfils this duty, you esteem her virtue, and yet you are allowing her
no greater indulgence than would be extended to the infamous wretch who
prostitutes herself!" Volumes might be filled with quotations of this
sort.

In 1815, after the restoration, as I was conversing with M. Bertrand de
Molleville, formerly Minister of the Marine under Louis XVI., a man of
great abilities, and who has distinguished himself in more ways than
one, he said:—"Your Bonaparte, your Napoleon, was a very extraordinary
man, it must be confessed. How little did we know him on the other side
of the water! We could not but yield to the conviction of his victories
and his invasions, it is true; but Genseric, Attila, and Alaric, were as
victorious as he. Thus he produced on me an impression of terror rather
than of admiration. But, since I have been here, I have taken the
trouble to look over the debates on the civil code, and I have ever
since been filled with profound veneration for him. But where in the
world did he collect all his knowledge?... I discover something new
every day. Ah! Sir, what a man you had at the head of your government.
Really, he was nothing less than a prodigy!..."

About five o’clock the Emperor received Captain Bowen, of the Salsette
frigate, which is to sail to-morrow. He behaved very condescendingly to
him. In the course of conversation the name of Lord St. Vincent, who the
Captain said was his patron, happened to be mentioned, on which the
Emperor remarked: “You will see him on your return to England, and I
commission you to present my compliments to him, as to a good sailor, a
brave and worthy veteran.”

About 7 o’clock the Emperor took a bath. He sent for me, and we
conversed for a long time, first on the events of the day, then on
literary subjects, and lastly on geography. He expressed his
astonishment that we possessed no certain knowledge of the interior of
Africa. I told him that I had entertained the idea, some years ago, of
presenting to his Minister of Marine a plan of a journey into the
interior of Africa; not a secret and adventurous excursion, but a
regular military expedition, in every respect worthy of the age and of
the Emperor. The Minister laughed in my face when I first conversed with
him on the subject, and looked upon the idea as an absurdity.

My plan was to have entered Africa at once on the north, south, east,
and west, and to have formed a junction in the centre; or, if starting
only from the east and west, I proposed that the two divisions of the
expedition should meet in the centre, separate again and proceed, one to
the north, the other to the south. I thought it probable that, after
obtaining from the Court of Portugal all the information that could be
procured, it would be found that there already existed a communication
from east to west, or that at all events very little was wanting to
effect it. The state of public feeling at the time, our enthusiasm, our
enterprizes, our prodigies, would have rendered it easy to procure 5 or
600 good soldiers, with the requisite number of surgeons, physicians,
botanists, chymists, astronomers, and naturalists, all willing to embark
in the enterprize, and we should undoubtedly have accomplished something
worthy of the age.

The necessary supply of beasts of burthen, small leathern boats for
crossing rivers, skins for conveying water through the deserts, and
light manageable field-pieces, would have rendered the execution of the
enterprize easy and complete.

“No doubt,” said the Emperor, “your idea would have pleased me. I should
have taken it up, submitted it to the consideration of a committee, and
brought it to a result.”

He said that he very much regretted his not having had time, during his
stay in Egypt, to accomplish something of this sort. He had troops
suited in every respect to brave the dangers of the desert. He had
received presents from the Queen of Darfour, and had sent her some in
return. Had he remained longer, he intended to have carried to a great
extent our geographical investigations in the northern district of
Africa, and that too by the simplest means, merely by placing in each
caravan some intelligent officers, for whom he would have procured
hostages.

The conversation then turned on the marine department. The Emperor
entered very deeply into the subject. He could not say that he was
satisfied with Decrès; and he even thought that the confidence he
reposed in him was not altogether irreproachable. The difficulty of
finding persons better qualified maintained him in his post; for, after
all, the Emperor said, Decrès was the best he could find. Ganteaume was
merely a sailor, and destitute of every other talent. Cafarelli, he
said, had forfeited his good opinion, because he had been informed that
his wife intrigued in political affairs, which he regarded as an
unpardonable offence. Missiessi was not a man to be depended on; for his
family had been one of those who surrendered Toulon. The Emperor had,
for a moment, cast his eye on Emériau; but, on consideration, he did not
think that he possessed adequate capabilities. He had asked himself
whether T...... might not have filled the post; but he decided that he
was not qualified for it. He was a good man of business, it is true; but
he had plunged very deeply into the affairs of the revolution; and what
had confirmed the Emperor in his disapproval of him was that he had
subsequently seen some of his private letters, by which it was evident
that he still adhered to his old jacobinical sentiments.

“I had,” observed the Emperor, “rendered the duties of all my
ministerial posts so easy that almost any one was capable of discharging
them, if he possessed only fidelity, zeal, and activity. I must however
except the office of Minister of Foreign Affairs, in which it was
frequently necessary to exercise a ready talent for persuasion. In
fact,” continued he, “in the marine department but little was required,
and Decrès was perhaps, after all, the best man I could have found. He
possessed authority; and he discharged the business of his office
scrupulously and honestly. He was endowed with a good share of
understanding, but this was evinced only in his conversation and private
conduct. He never conceived any plan of his own, and was incapable of
executing the ideas of others on a grand scale; he could walk, but he
could never be made to run. He ought to have passed one-half of his time
in the sea-ports, or on board the exercising squadrons. He would have
lost none of my favour by so doing. But, as a courtier, he was afraid to
quit his portfolio. This shews how little he knew me. He would not have
been the less protected by removing from my Court: his absence would
have been a powerful circumstance in his favour.”

The Emperor said he very much regretted Latouche-Tréville, whom he
regarded as a man of real talent. He was of opinion that that Admiral
would have given a different impulse to affairs. The attack on India and
the invasion of England would by him have been at least attempted, and
perhaps accomplished.

The Emperor blamed himself for having employed the pinnaces at Bologne.
He said it would have been better had he employed real ships at
Cherbourg. He was of opinion that had Villeneuve manifested more vigour
at Cape Finistèrre, the attack might have been rendered practicable. “I
had made arrangements for the arrival of Villeneuve, with considerable
art and calculation, and in defiance of the opinions and the routine of
the naval officers by whom I was surrounded. Every thing happened as I
had foreseen; when the inactivity of Villeneuve ruined all. But,” added
the Emperor, "Heaven knows what instructions he might have received from
Decrès,[10] or what letters might have been privately written to him
which never came to my knowledge; for, though I was very powerful and
fond of searching into every thing, yet I am convinced that I was far
from knowing all that was passing around me.

Footnote 10:

  On reading this reflection of Napoleon’s, an officer in the confidence
  of Admiral Villeneuve wrote to me that the letter of Decrès to that
  Admiral before the arrival of M. de Rosilly, appointed to supersede
  him, concluded thus;—"Sail as soon as you find a favourable
  opportunity: do not shun the enemy; on the contrary attack him
  wherever you fall in with him, since the Emperor cares little about
  losing ships, so he loses them with honour." This letter was the only
  one which the officer in question saved from the Admiral’s portfolio,
  before he threw it into the sea, at the moment of striking the flag.

"The Grand Marshal said, the other day, that it used to be remarked in
the saloon of the household that I was never accessible to any one after
I had given audience to the Minister of the Marine. The reason was,
because he never had any but bad news to communicate to me. For my part
I gave up every thing after the disaster of Trafalgar; I could not be
every where, and I had enough to occupy my attention with the armies of
the continent.

"I had long meditated a decisive expedition to India; but my plans had
been constantly frustrated. I intended to have fitted out a force of
16,000 troops, on board ships of the line; each 74 to have taken 500
troops on board, which would of course have required thirty-two ships. I
proposed that they should take in a supply of water for four months;
which supply might have been renewed at the Isle of France, or in any
habitable spot of the desert of Africa, Brazil, or the Indian Ocean. In
case of need, they might have taken in water wherever they chose to
anchor. On reaching the place of their destination, the troops were to
be put ashore, and the ships were immediately to depart, making up the
number of their crews by the sacrifice of seven or eight of the vessels
which might be condemned as unserviceable; so that an English squadron
arriving from Europe immediately afterwards would have found no trace of
ours.

“As for the army, when abandoned to itself and placed under the command
of a clever and confidential chief, it would have renewed the prodigies
that were familiar to us, and Europe would have beheld the conquest of
India as she had already seen the conquest of Egypt.”

I knew Decrès well; we had both commenced our career together in the
marine. I think he entertained for me all the friendship of which he was
susceptible, and I, on my part, was tenderly attached to him. It was an
unfortunate passion, as I used to say when I was rallied on the subject,
which was frequently the case, for Decrès was very much disliked, and I
have often thought that, from some motive or other, he took pleasure in
his own unpopularity. At St. Helena, as elsewhere, I found myself almost
his only defender. I saw a great deal of him while the Emperor was at
the island of Elba, and he was occasionally favourable to Napoleon. We
conversed candidly on the subject, and I have every reason to believe
that he observed full and entire confidence with respect to me.

“No sooner had your Majesty returned to the Tuileries,” said I to the
Emperor, "than Decrès and I ran to embrace each other, exclaiming, ‘He
has returned! we have him again!’ His eyes were suffused with tears; I
must bear this testimony to his feelings. ‘Well,’ said he to me, in the
presence of his wife, ‘I am now convinced that I have often done you
wrong, and I owe you reparation; but your old habits and connections so
naturally brought you in contact with those who are now about to quit us
that I doubted not but you would sooner or later be perfectly reconciled
with them, though you were perhaps often offended at the expression of
my real sentiments.’”—“And did you believe this, you simpleton?"
exclaimed the Emperor, bursting into a fit of laughter. “This was an
excellent piece of courtier-like art; a touch for La Bruyère. It was
really a good idea on the part of Decrès; for if, during my absence, any
thing offensive to me had chanced to escape him, he would, you see, by
this means, have atoned for it once for all.”—"Well, Sire," continued I,
"what I have just told you is perhaps only amusing; but what I will now
communicate is of a more important nature:—During the crisis of 1814,
before the taking of Paris, Decrès was sounded in a very artful way as
to his inclination to conspire against your Majesty, and he honestly
repelled the suggestion. Decrès was easily and often roused to
discontent; and he possessed a certain air of authority in his language
and manners which rendered him a useful acquisition to any party he
might espouse. He happened, at the unhappy period I have just mentioned,
to visit a person of celebrity; the hero of the machinations of the day.
The latter advanced to Decrès, and, drawing him aside to the fire-place,
took up a book, saying, I have just now been reading something that
struck me forcibly,—you shall hear it. Montesquiou, in such and such a
chapter and page, says,—When the Prince rises above the laws, when
tyranny becomes insupportable, the oppressed have no alternative
but....—‘Enough,’ exclaimed Decrès, putting his hand over the mouth of
the reader; ‘I will hear no more; close the book.’ And the other coolly
laid down the volume, as though nothing particular had occurred, and
began to talk on a totally different subject."

On another occasion, a certain Marshal, after his fatal defection,
alarmed at the unfavourable impression which his conduct was calculated
to produce on the public mind, and vainly seeking the approbation and
support of those who surrounded him, endeavoured to interest Decrès in
his favour. “I have always borne in mind,” said he to Decrès, “one of
our conversations in which you so energetically painted the evils and
perplexities that weighed upon the country. The force of your arguments
greatly influenced me in the step which I took with the view of
alleviating our misfortunes.”—"Yes, my dear fellow," replied Decrès;
“but did it not also occur to you that you overshot your mark?”

“In order that these anecdotes may be appreciated as they deserve,” said
I to the Emperor, “I must inform your Majesty that they were related to
me by Decrès himself during your absence, and when he certainly
entertained no idea of your return.”

The Emperor kept up the conversation for nearly two hours in the bath.
He did not dine till nine o’clock, and he desired me to stay with him.
We discoursed about the military school at Paris. I left the school only
a year before Napoleon entered it, and therefore the same officers,
tutors, and comrades were common to us both. He took particular pleasure
in reverting with me to this period of our youth: in reviving the
recollection of our occupations, our boyish tricks, our games, &c.

In this cheerful humour, he called for a glass of Champagne, which was
rather an unusual thing; for such is his habitual abstinence that a
single glass of wine is sufficient to flush his face, and to render him
very talkative. It is well known that he seldom sits longer than a
quarter of an hour, or half an hour, at table; but to-day we sat upwards
of two hours. He was very much surprised when Marchand informed him that
it was eleven o’clock. “How rapidly the time has slipped away,” said he,
with an expression of satisfaction. “Why can I not always pass my hours
thus agreeably! My dear Las Cases,” said he, as he dismissed me, “you
leave me happy.”

DANGEROUS ILLNESS OF MY SON.—REMARKABLE OBSERVATIONS.—THE DICTIONARY OF
  WEATHERCOCKS.—BERTHOLET.

13th. Dr. Warden and two other medical gentlemen came to hold a
consultation on my son, whose indisposition alarmed me.

The Emperor, at my request, consented to receive Dr. Warden, our old
acquaintance of the Northumberland. He conversed for upwards of two
hours, familiarly taking a review of those acts of his government which
had drawn upon him the greatest share of enmity, falsehood, and calumny.
As the Doctor afterwards observed to me, nothing could be more correct,
clear, simple, curious, and satisfactory, than these details.

The Emperor concluded with the following remarkable observations: “I
concern myself but little about the libels that have been written
against me. My acts and the events of my reign refute them more
completely than the most skilful arguments that could be employed. I
seated myself on a vacant throne. I arrived at supreme power unsullied
by the crimes that have usually disgraced the chiefs of dynasties. Let
history be consulted, let me be compared with others! If I have to fear
the reproaches of posterity and history, it is not for having been too
severe but perhaps for having been too indulgent!”

After dinner, the Emperor looked at the _Dictionnaire des Girouettes_
(Dictionary of Weathercocks) which is humourously conceived, though not
so well executed. It is an alphabetic collection of the living
characters who have figured on the stage of public events since the
Revolution, and whose language, opinions, and conduct have followed the
changes of the wind. Weathercocks are affixed to their names, with an
abstract of the speeches or a description of the acts which have
procured for them the distinction. On opening the work, the Emperor
inquired whether any of us were mentioned in it. “No Sire,” some one
present jokingly replied, “none save your Majesty.” The name of Napoleon
was indeed recorded in the work, because, as it was affirmed, he had
first sanctioned the republic and then assumed the prerogative of
royalty.

The Emperor read to us several articles from the Dictionary. The
contrast exhibited at different times in the language and conduct of
certain individuals was truly curious; and the transition was in some
instances performed with so much coolness and effrontery that the
Emperor several times suspended his reading and burst into a hearty fit
of laughter. However, after going through a few pages, he closed the
book, with an expression of disgust and regret, observing that, after
all, the publication was a disgrace to society, a code of turpitude, and
a record of our dishonour. One article seemed to affect him deeply,
namely, that concerning Bertholet, whom he had so loaded with favour,
and on whom, he said, he had every reason to rely.

The following charming trait in the Emperor’s character may be mentioned
here, though it is pretty generally known. Bertholet had sustained
losses which involved him in difficulties, when, the circumstance having
come to the Emperor’s knowledge, he sent him 100,000 crowns, adding,
that he had reason to complain of him, since he seemed to have forgotten
that he, Napoleon, was always ready to serve his friends. Bertholet,
however, behaved very ungratefully to the Emperor, at the period of his
disasters. His conduct deeply affected Napoleon at the time, and he was
often heard to exclaim: “What Bertholet, on whom I thought I could rely
with such confidence!...”

On the Emperor’s return from Elba, Bertholet seemed again inclined to
manifest his former sentiments of attachment to his benefactor. He
ventured to show himself at the Tuileries, and desired Monge to inform
the Emperor that, if he did not obtain a sight of him, he would put a
period to his existence the moment he left the palace. The Emperor could
not refuse his request, and saluted him with a smile as he passed by.

During his reign, the Emperor had conferred repeated favours on several
great manufacturers, among others on Oberkamp, Richard Lenoir, &c. He
wished to look for their names in the Dictionary, but every voice was
raised to bear witness to their good conduct.

               RECEPTION OF THE PASSENGERS IN THE BENGAL
                                 FLEET.

14th.—About four o’clock a great number of visitors came to Longwood,
They were passengers who had arrived by the East India Fleet, and the
Emperor had signified his willingness to receive them. The party
consisted of Mr. Strange, the brother-in-law of Lord Melville, First
Lord of the English Admiralty; a Mr. Arbuthnot; and Sir William
Burroughs, one of the Judges of the Supreme Court of Calcutta; two of
Lord Moira’s Aides-de-camp; and some others, together with several
ladies. We were all conversing together in the ante-chamber, when the
Emperor left his own room to proceed to the garden. This circumstance
excited the curiosity of our visitors, who eagerly flew to the windows
to see him pass by:—the scene reminded us of Plymouth. The Grand Marshal
conducted our visitors to the presence of the Emperor, who received them
with the most perfect grace, and with that captivating smile which has
exercised such irresistible power. Curiosity and lively emotion were
painted in the countenances of all.

The Emperor conversed with each individual, and, according to custom,
instantly seized any circumstance that happened to be connected with
their names, as he heard them announced. He discoursed with the Supreme
Judge on legislation and the administration of justice; with the
Company’s officers on trade and the internal Government of India. He
questioned the military gentlemen as to how many years they had served
and how many wounds they had received; he paid many flattering
compliments to the ladies, and remarked, that the climate of Bengal had
not spoiled the delicacy of their complexions, &c. Then, addressing
himself to one of Lord Moira’s aides-de-camp, he observed that the Grand
Marshal had informed him that Lady Loudon was on the Island, and that,
had she been within his limits, he should have had great pleasure in
paying his respects to her; but that, as she happened to reside beyond
the boundaries which had been prescribed to him, he had no more
opportunity of seeing her than if she were still in Bengal.

During these conversations, in which I acted as interpreter, Mr.
Strange, with whom I had previously been talking, drew me aside by the
flap of my coat, and in a tone of surprise and satisfaction said:—"What
grace and dignity of manner the Emperor displays!—he shows that he has
been accustomed to the etiquette of holding a levee!"

We conducted the company to the drawing-room, and curiosity led them to
take a peep at the Emperor’s apartments. Sir William Burroughs, who,
from the post he holds, may be supposed to have some connection with the
English ministry, on entering the drawing-room asked me whether it was
our dining-room. I informed him that it was the drawing-room, or that we
might more properly say, it was the only room in the house; at this he
was much astonished. I then pointed out to him through the window, the
two little chambers which are all the Emperor has for his own use. His
countenance expressed regret, and he seemed, in his own mind to be
drawing comparisons between the present and the past. Remarking the
wretchedness of the furniture and the narrow limits of our abode, he
said, with an air of concern—"You will be better provided for
soon."—"How," said I, “is there any intention of removing us from the
Island?”—"No, but some elegant furniture and a commodious house are to
be sent to you."—"We do not," I replied, “complain of the furniture, or
the house; but of the rock to which we have been banished, and the
latitude in which it is situated. This latitude cannot be changed and we
can never be well here.”

I repeated to him literally what the Emperor had, a few days previously
said to the Governor on the same subject. Sir William was amazed, and,
pressing my hand, he said with a degree of warmth:—"My dear Sir, he is
too great and too gifted a man; we have too much cause to dread and fear
him."—"But," said I, in my turn, “why not have driven the car of glory
together, instead of mutually destroying each other by dragging it
different ways? What might not then have been its course?” He looked at
me, and again pressing my hand, he said with a pensive air:—"Yes, that
would doubtless have been better; but...."

All were particularly struck with the Emperor’s freedom of manner, and
his tranquil expression of countenance. I know not what they had
expected to see. One remarked that he could scarcely form a conception
of the strength of mind necessary to enable Napoleon to endure such
wonderful reverses. “That is,” replied I, "because nobody yet well knows
the Emperor’s character. He told us the other day that he had been like
a block of marble during all the great events of his life; that they had
slipped over him without producing any impression either on his moral or
physical faculties."

After dinner, the Emperor asked us, as he often does, what we should
like to read. Some one proposed that we should resume the Dictionary of
Weathercocks; but this the Emperor objected to, on the ground that it
served but to render his evenings the more unpleasant. “Rather let us
amuse ourselves with fiction,” said he; and, asking for Jerusalem
Delivered, he read aloud several cantos of that poem, occasionally
translating passages into French. He then read the chief part both of
Phedre and Athalie, always expressing his great admiration of the
writings of Racine.

EQUALITY OF PUNISHMENTS.—THE EMPEROR REQUIRES ME TO GIVE HIM A DETAILED
  HISTORY OF MY ATLAS.

15th.—The Emperor, during his walk, conversed on various subjects, and
at length happened to light on that of crimes and punishments. He
observed that the greatest jurists, even those who had been influenced
by the spirit of the age, were divided as to the principle of the
equalization of capital punishments. At the establishment of the Code,
he should have been averse to equalization, had not circumstances
obliged him to adopt a contrary course. He asked my opinion: “I am,”
said I, "decidedly favourable to the inequality of punishments. Our
notions demand a gradation in punishments, analogous to that which we
conceive in crimes. The harmony of our sensations seems to require this.
I can never bring myself to rank on a level with each other the wretch
who has murdered his father and him who has merely committed a slight
robbery accompanied by violence. Should these two criminals be visited
by the same punishment?

“In this question the criminal himself is least of all to be considered.
The punishment is his business; and humanity discovers many hidden modes
of relieving his physical suffering. His ideas previously to the
commission of the crime, the feelings which his punishment creates in
the minds of the spectators, and the effect it produces on society in
general:—these are the points which must claim the attention of the
legislator in deciding the question of the equalization of punishments.
It is erroneous to suppose that death alone is sufficient, and that the
kind of death has no influence on the mind of the criminal in the
premeditation of his crime; for if there be inequality of punishment,
there is no culprit who would not make his choice if he were permitted
so to do. Let any member of society consult his own feelings: he would
shudder at the very idea of certain punishments, while perhaps he would
be totally indifferent to certain modes of death. The inequality of
punishments and the solemnity of executions belong therefore to the
justice and policy of civilization. Yet I conceive that it would now be
impossible to subdue public opinion on this point.”[11]

Footnote 11:

  I must however confess that my opinion is likely to be erroneous, if,
  as I have been informed, the statements of the registers in France,
  since the introduction of the equalization of punishments, when
  compared with those drawn up during a similar interval under the old
  penal laws, present a diminution in the number of criminals.

The Emperor entirely concurred in these ideas. Having mentioned the
crime of regicide, he observed that it might truly be said to be the
greatest of all crimes, owing to the consequences which it produced.
“The man,” said he, “who should have murdered me in France would have
subverted all Europe; and how many times have I not been exposed to
assassination!”

Lady Loudon, wife of Lord Moira, the Governor-General of India, has been
for several days at St. Helena, where she attracts general attention.
She is a lady of high rank, corresponding nearly with a French Duchess
under the old regime. The English officers treat her with the utmost
respect. To-day the Admiral invited her to a little entertainment on
board the Northumberland. He sent a messenger on horseback to request me
to lend him my Atlas for the evening, in order that he might shew it to
Lady Loudon, whose husband was described in it as the first
representative of the Plantagenets, and consequently as the legitimate
heir to the throne of England.

The Admiral and I were on a footing of perfect indifference; indeed we
had been nearly strangers to each other since the moment he put me
ashore. The request was not so much a mark of politeness to me, as a
compliment to the work itself. The Atlas had been the subject of
conversation, the lady had expressed a wish to see it, and the Admiral
felt a desire to shew it to her. However, I was unable to satisfy this
desire. The book was in the Emperor’s chamber, and such was the answer I
returned.

The Emperor smiled at the honour which the Admiral had intended for me;
and I could not help pitying the amusement that had been prepared for
the lady. This circumstance led the Emperor himself to speak of the
Atlas, and to repeat some observations which had fallen from him before.
He remarked that he heard my work spoken of at all times and in all
places; that he found it sought after by foreigners as well as
Frenchmen. He had heard it mentioned on board the Bellerophon and the
Northumberland, at the Island of St. Helena, and, in short, every where,
persons of information and rank either knew the work, or expressed a
wish to become acquainted with it. “This,” said he, in a lively strain,
“is what I call enjoying a real triumph, a great reputation in the
literary world. I wish you would give me the history of this Atlas. Tell
me when and how you conceived the idea of it, the manner in which it was
executed, and its results: why you first of all published it under a
fictitious name, and why you did not afterwards affix your real name to
it: in short, give me a true and particular account; you understand, Mr.
Councillor of State?”

I replied that it would be a long story; though to me the recital would
not be devoid of pleasure; for, I added, that my Atlas was the history
of a great portion of my life, and that, above all, I was indebted to it
for the happiness of being now near the person of the Emperor.

The following is the narrative, such as it appeared when corrected after
my first hasty notes. Its length, doubtless, requires indulgence; but
this I trust the reader will be inclined to grant, on consideration that
the details which I here enter into revive the recollection of my
happiest years, of the period of my youth, my health and strength, in a
word, of the dear but brief interval of the plenitude of life. I once
more entreat the reader to pardon the prolixity in which I have
indulged; but this statement so forcibly revives my recollections of
past happiness that even now, on reading it over, I cannot find it in my
heart to cancel any part of it.

"This Work was partly the fruit of chance; but above all, of necessity,
which, as the common proverb says, is the mother of industry.... At the
time of the first reverses of the French emigrants, I was cast by the
political hurricane in the streets of London, without friends, without
money, and without resources; but possessing the requisite courage and
willingness for exertion. To a man animated by such a spirit, London, at
that time, afforded certain sources of emolument.

"After having unsuccessfully made several applications, I determined to
rely on myself alone, and, like Figaro, I decided on turning author. For
a moment, I had thoughts of becoming a romance writer: this idea was
suggested to me by the proposals of a bookseller; but he required too
much and was inclined to pay too little. I then turned my thoughts to
writing history, which, at all events, was calculated to procure for me
a certain moral advantage, by storing my mind with positive knowledge.
It was then I conceived the first idea of my Atlas, which I may truly
regard as an inspiration from Heaven, for to it I owed my life. The work
was at first a simple sketch, a mere nomenclature, very different from
the form in which it now appears. However, it sufficed immediately to
relieve me from embarrassment, and to secure to me what might be called
a little fortune, in comparison with the miseries endured by the other
emigrants. Then, Sire, came the Peace of Amiens, and the benefits
conferred on us by your amnesty. I was enabled to make a journey to
France, merely as a traveller, having no other object in view than to
breathe my native air and to see the French capital. There I found
myself at liberty to express my sentiments without restraint;
investigation was easy; my ideas and my judgment were enlarged; I was
master of my time, and I undertook to arrange my Atlas in the form in
which it now appears. I proposed publishing regularly four sheets per
quarter. I was now vastly improved both in my mind and circumstances.
Interest, attention, good offers, money and connexions, poured in upon
me; and I may confidently affirm that this was the happiest period of my
life.

"In England, I had published my Work under a feigned name, in order to
avoid compromising the honour of my own. I happened to fix upon Le Sage,
just as I might have decided on Leblanc, Legris, or Lenoir. But I could
not have made a more unlucky choice, or, at least, I could not have
assumed a more general appellation. Sometime afterwards, a letter
intended for me passed through all the different colonies of French
emigrants in London, and was delivered by turns to twenty-two priests,
who all bore the name of Le Sage. At length one, who had apparently
discovered that the name did not belong to me, sent me the letter in a
violent rage, observing that, when people thought proper to change their
names, they should at least avoid taking those that belonged to other
persons.

"In France I still preserved the name of Le Sage, which had now become
identified with my Atlas. To have published it under a new name might
have led to the supposition that it was a new work. Besides, I did not
wish to expose my own name to the chance of failure, to the attacks of
the Journals, or to the bickerings of criticism. Even though I had been
assured of the complete success of the work, I should not probably have
felt the more inclined to affix my real name to it, owing to a remnant
of my old prejudices, of which I could not easily divest myself.

"Certainly this literary fame flattered me not a little; but I had
sprung from a warlike race, and I conceived that I was in duty bound to
pursue fame of another kind. However, circumstances rendered this
impossible, and I think it proper to mention that at least I was not
unconscious of the duty. I never had cause to repent of my double
appellation. Independently of my real motive for assuming it, it
diffused around me an air of adventure and romance which was by no means
disagreeable, and which was moreover in unison with my temper and
character. It occasioned many mistakes and humourous scenes which
afforded me considerable amusement. In England, for example, I have
often, when in company, been questioned in the most innocent way
imaginable respecting the merits of M. Le Sage’s work; and at a
boarding-school I was once addressed in very discourteous language,
because I obstinately persisted in condemning my own Atlas.

"So long as I continued myself to manage the publication of the work, my
method was to treat in person with all who offered to set their names
down as subscribers. I had now no favours to solicit; I rather found it
necessary in some instances to guard against receiving those that were
offered. In France particularly I was overwhelmed with acts of kindness
and flattering compliments. Some paid me these attentions because they
knew me, others precisely because they did not know me; and all because
I conducted myself alike to each. For my part, I enjoyed the curious
spectacle that now presented itself to me. As every one who wished to
become a subscriber was obliged to give in his own name, I took a review
of many characters, whom I well knew, and observed them in silence. I
was thus enabled to meditate at my ease on the curious diversity of
opinion, judgment, and taste. The point which one condemned was
precisely that which another most admired, which a third declared to be
indispensable, and which a fourth pronounced to be inadmissible. Each
according to custom failed not to set forth his own opinion as the
prevailing one: it was the sentiment of all Paris and of every body.

"I had now an opportunity of being convinced of the great advantage that
a man derives from superintending his own business himself, and of the
important influence of politeness and good manners in all the affairs of
life. I acceded to every thing that was proposed, I received every hint
that was suggested, and I was repaid a hundred-fold for my complaisance.
It frequently happened that a person who had called on me, without any
intention of purchasing the work, was not only induced to carry it away
with him, but brought me ten, twenty, or even a hundred, additional
subscribers.

"One described my Atlas as a classic work to the Minister of the
Interior; another recommended it to the Minister for Foreign Affairs; a
third promised to procure for me the decoration of the Legion of Honour,
and a fourth wrote a flattering critique on the work, and got it
inserted in the public journals. Some carried their interest and
attachment for me even to a degree of enthusiasm. Of this the following
are instances. One of my provincial subscribers, who was unacquainted
with me, wrote to request, as a particular favour, that I would get my
portrait engraved to embellish the work, offering, in case I acceded to
the proposition, to defray half the expenses of the engraving. Another,
who was the owner of the Chateau de Montmorency, paid me a visit every
week under pretence of enquiring whether I had got a new sheet of my
Atlas ready for publication, but in reality, as he himself assured me,
to pass his happiest hours in my society. He added that, if ever I
should take a fancy to sell my conversation as I did the sheets of my
work, it was in my power, if I chose, to ruin him. I afterwards learned
that this was a man of a very eccentric turn; one of La Bruyere’s
characters; quite after the manner of Jean-Jacques. For a considerable
time he seemed to rack his invention to make me offers of service in the
most delicate way imaginable: he even went so far as to throw out
paternal suggestions to me. ‘M. Le Sage,’ said he, oftener than once
‘you ought to marry. You possess qualities that are calculated to insure
the happiness of a wife, and still more that of a father-in-law.’ I must
not omit to mention that the old gentleman had but one daughter, and she
was a rich heiress. However, the warmth of our intimacy gradually
abated, till at length I entirely lost the acquaintance. It was not
until a considerable time afterwards that, being on a country excursion
with a party of ladies, the sight of the Chateau de Montmorency revived
the recollection of my old friend. I related the history of his
eccentricities to the ladies who accompanied me: their curiosity was
excited, and we determined to visit the chateau. The porter refused to
admit us. On my enquiring whether the gentleman was at his country
residence, I received for answer that he was there, and that this was
precisely the reason why we could not be admitted. I thought it very
extraordinary that he should thus immure himself and render himself
totally inaccessible. With considerable difficulty I prevailed on the
servant to announce M. Le Sage. The sound of the name operated like
enchantment; the affront offered to an elegant calash and rich liveries
was immediately repaired. The gates were thrown open, apparently to the
no small astonishment of the porter. The servants received orders to
show us over the building and to offer us every kind of refreshment. We
had brought with us in the carriage provisions for a little rural
repast; but a sumptuous dinner was laid out for us in one of the best
apartments; and we could not, with any thing like a good grace, decline
accepting what was so politely offered. All this hospitality was
perfectly disinterested on the part of the worthy old gentleman, who was
confined to his chamber by the gout. He was overjoyed at seeing me; and
he seemed to regard my visit as the return of the prodigal son. He
insisted on seeing the ladies who accompanied me, and was carried into
the dining-room to do the honours of the dessert. One thing that amused
us infinitely was that he seemed to have no idea of the rank of the
friends by whom I was accompanied; and he treated them like persons of
inferior rank, though they were in reality ladies of distinction. The
old gentleman would now scarcely allow me to depart; he insisted on my
repeating my visit, and said, that I and all my friends should ever be
welcome to his residence. But alas! I could not avail myself of his
kindness; for a few days afterwards I read in the papers an account of
the death of this kind and sincere friend.

"From the commencement of my greatness, I may, under every point of
view, date the termination of the golden age of my Atlas. When I was
transplanted to Court and permitted to approach your Majesty’s person, I
conceived that I could not with propriety descend to the details that
had hitherto occupied me. I confided the management of the copyright to
one of my old college companions, who had been an emigrant like myself,
but who did not turn the publication to so good an account as I had
done.

"On entering upon my new post at Court, I was loaded with compliments on
my production; but to these I replied indifferently, and just as one
would do at a ball, after dropping one’s mask. When it was found that I
never alluded to my work, that I never quoted from it, and that I
avoided all discussion on it, I was never spoken to on the subject; and
at length people began to wonder how I had ever written it, and indeed
to doubt whether I had any right at all to be considered as its author.

"On hearing these words, the Emperor said to me, ‘My dear Las Cases,
even this doubt has found its way to St. Helena. I have heard it
affirmed that the work was not written by you, that you purchased the
manuscript from the real author; and in support of this assertion it has
been remarked that you know nothing at all about the book, because you
never speak of it. To these observations,’ continued he, ‘I have merely
contented myself with saying, Did you never know any question to remain
without a complete answer? Besides I recognise throughout the whole work
the style, the very expressions, of Las Cases.’

“Many,” said I, resuming my narrative, "will think I injured myself by
this denial; but I preferred good taste to quackery, and I was only
acting according to the dictates of my natural disposition. Your Majesty
was the other day describing how Syees used to present himself loaded
with written plans, and at the very first word of contradiction, as soon
as he found it necessary to act on the defensive, he would gather up his
papers and be off in a moment. This was precisely my feeling. I never
could stand up publicly to support my opinions. Before I could do this,
I must enjoy the authority of rank or the freedom of intimate
friendship: otherwise I prefer dooming myself to silence, that is to
say, when I am not interrogated and urged to the point. But to return to
my subject.

"So long as I remained in obscurity I enjoyed the good-will of every
one; but my elevation rendered me an object of enmity, and I felt the
influence of that vague feeling of envy and malevolence which ever
follows the footsteps of fortune. The public journals, which for a
length of time had overflowed with flattery and agreeable expressions in
favour of the Historical Atlas, now inserted some very ill-natured
articles respecting the work, and when these were traced to their
source, the writers frankly avowed that they had been occasioned solely
by changes that had taken place in political opinions and public
affairs.

"A report was delivered to the Institute of all the works that had
appeared for several years past; and in this report the Atlas was very
severely treated. Happening to be one day in company with the writer of
this report, to whom I was known only by the name of Le Sage, I
expressed to him my dissatisfaction at what he had said of the Atlas. He
candidly confessed that the work and its author were alike unknown to
him; that, having found the labour of writing the report too much for
him, he had divided the task among several other persons. He informed me
that the article on Le Sage’s Atlas was infinitely more severe when
delivered to him than it appeared as inserted in the report. He had
softened it down considerably. ‘I can easily perceive,’ continued he,
‘that you have enemies in the literary world, and for these you are
indebted to your habits and your situation. You have connected yourself
with a Count somebody, who holds places at Court; but courtiers and
authors never agree well together. Those gentlemen are, for the most
part, very unlike us. It is said that, in this curious partnership, you
supply the talent and he provides the money. What is the use of that?
The Count is only making his profit of you; your work is good, and your
bookseller would have remunerated you for it. However, I am only
repeating what I have heard, and I advise you to what I conceive to be
your interest. If you wish to enjoy our suffrage, you must connect
yourself with us, you must identify yourself with our doctrines, and
leave the great folks to themselves.’

"I replied, with all possible civility, that I was certainly indebted to
him for his kind advice, though it was not just then in my power to
follow it. I assured him that he had formed an unfair opinion of my
friend; that our purses and our very lives were common to each other;
that our friendship and intimacy were indissoluble; that we had vowed to
live and die together, and that nothing could induce us to break that
vow. It was altogether a truly comic scene.

"Some time afterwards I was dining at the table of a Prince: I was
seated beside my illustrious host, and wore a uniform covered with lace.
The member of the Institute was one of the guests. Surprise and
embarrassment were portrayed in his countenance. I spoke to him several
times; but he always drew close to his neighbours, whispering to them,
and apparently making enquiries. After dinner, he came up to me, and
very good-humouredly begged me to relieve him from his perplexity. He
said that he perfectly recollected having had the honour of meeting me
before, but that he was quite at a loss to comprehend the trick that I
had played upon him. I disclaimed any intention of hoaxing him. ‘All
that you have seen,’ said I, ‘and all that I have told you, is nothing
but reality and truth. The mystery is easily solved. You then saw M. Le
Sage who supplies the talent, and you now see M. Le Comte who provides
the funds. You now understand how histories are written, and I have
learned how reports are made out.’

“An equally ridiculous mistake procured for M. Le Sage in the famous
Yellow Dwarf, the honour of being set down as a Weathercock, in quality
of genealogist of the order under the humorous name of _Parvulus
Sapiens_ (Little Le Sage). For this favour, as I afterwards learned, I
was indebted to the suppression that was made during the King’s reign of
the genealogy of your Majesty, whose descent I was supposed to have
traced from Æneas and Ascanuis. It is difficult to conceive what could
have been meant by all this, as there was nothing in the Atlas that
could either directly or indirectly have suggested such an idea.
However, at all the various times at which the Atlas and its author were
assailed, numerous zealous and fervent partisans enquired whether I
would be pleased to permit them to take up my defence. I invariably
desired that the subject might be dropped; I conceived that, by thus
occupying public attention, I should surely endanger my own
tranquillity. I smiled at the ill-natured attacks that were made on poor
M. Le Sage; but I should have been very sorry to have seen them extended
to his _alias_.

“If however my Atlas enjoyed this general and extensive success, it
certainly deserved it. The work is indeed adapted to every age, to every
country, to every period; it is suited to all opinions, classes and
plans of education. It is an assistant to him who wishes to learn, and a
remembrancer to him who has learned. It is a guide to the scholar and an
illustrator to the master. It embraces chronology, history, geography,
politics, &c. To those who understand it, and know how to use it, it may
be truly said to compose a whole library in itself. It is the _vade
mecum_ of the pupil and the tutor, of the scholar and the man of
business.

“Thus it had an immediate sale, and never, I imagine, did any literary
work prove so productive to its author. On its first appearance, the
daily subscriptions frequently amounted to 2 or 300 louis. During the
period when I personally superintended the publication, I calculated
that the receipts constituted a yearly income of at least 60 or 80,000
francs. It procured me a fortune. I had no other, for the Revolution had
deprived me of my patrimony, which I had afterwards no hope of
recovering; for I had been obliged to renounce it upon oath, before I
could be permitted to set foot on the French territory.

“There have been published 8 or 10,000 copies of my Atlas in various
editions; and their sale has thrown into circulation 8 or 900,000,
perhaps a million of francs, out of which there has been a clear profit
of 300,000 francs now in my hands. This constitutes my whole fortune,
for I possess nothing that has not arisen out of my Atlas, and that may
not be included in its accounts. On my departure from Europe, the sum of
150,000 francs was due to me in outstanding debts, either good or bad;
and I possessed a collection of books obtained by exchange, worth
200,000 francs; which being divided into lots of 1000 crowns each, and
exported to foreign countries, seemed to promise certain returns. But,
unfortunately, out of all this brilliant produce, I can now only reckon
upon what I have already in my hands; the rest is involved in so many
chances that I cannot but consider it as lost. I have no agent in Europe
to manage my affairs, for I had not time to make arrangements for that
purpose; and the details are so numerous, scattered, and diversified,
that I could not possibly give any one a clue to follow. The outstanding
debts are growing old; some of my debtors are dead, some have left the
country, and as for the books, they are mostly scattered about, spoiled,
and lost.

“At one time my work was on the point of ensuring to me the possession
of a brilliant fortune; but my prospects were defeated by the vilest
shuffling. The details of this case are so curious that I cannot forbear
mentioning them to your Majesty.

“At the commencement of the year 1813, two merchants, who had discovered
that I was the author of Le Sage’s Historical Atlas, called on me, and
offered, if I would supply them with two millions’ worth of copies, to
pay me immediately at the rate of 20 per cent. in ready money, and to
convey the books gratis to London, where they should still be my
property and should remain at my disposal. I stared at this—I could not
conceive what was meant, and suspected that the merchants were hoaxing
me. They, on the other hand, sought to explain themselves, by saying
that the offer was made for the sake of procuring licences, an affair
with which they found I was totally unacquainted. On repeating this
conversation to a friend, I afterwards learned that the vessels which
were licensed to sail to England, to bring home colonial goods, could
not leave France without exporting goods equal in nominal value to their
intended importation. Books were included among the allowable objects of
exportation, and the merchants sought to obtain a light freight and a
high price, which, at little expense, would entitle them to a
considerable importation. My Atlas was admirably calculated for this
kind of speculation. However, before I entered into any agreement, I
consulted the Director General of Customs, and the President of the
Committee of Exportation, by whom I was informed that the thing was
perfectly legal. With this assurance I immediately set to work. I
entered upon one of the most curious speculations that can possibly be
conceived. Only a brief interval was allowed me for making the necessary
preparations. One hundred forms in folio were distributed among thirty
of the principal printing offices in Paris; and from that moment the
presses were kept at work without intermission. All the vellum paper of
a certain size was bought up, and it daily increased in price until it
reached upwards of 100 per cent. Such a general bustle prevailed among
all the printers in Paris as to alarm the police, until the affair was
fully investigated and explained. I afforded employment either directly
or indirectly to between 300 and 400 hands. At the expiration of
one-and-twenty days I was to be ready with the two millions worth of
copies of the Atlas, and was to receive 400,000 francs in ready money. I
was perhaps the only individual in the world who could have engaged in
such a speculation; for by a singular chance, I had kept all my forms
ready composed by purchasing the types at a vast expense. I was now
reaping the fruits of ten years’ industry and expenditure. This was
truly a prize in the lottery. I was mad with joy at my unexpected good
fortune. But alas! I was building on a sandy foundation, and I was
doomed to pay dearly for the few happy moments of my illusion.

“The cynical M. de P——, the Director General of the bookselling trade,
who was my colleague in the Council of State, seemed bent on my ruin,
though I was unable to divine the cause of his animosity. While he was
giving me every assurance of his readiness to serve me, he was, in an
underhand way straining every nerve to injure me; and was exciting
against me all the most active booksellers, whom he had induced to
become the agents of his operations. Of these facts I can entertain no
doubt; for the letters secretly written on this subject by P.... were
confidentially communicated to me; but motives of delicacy forbid my
taking the satisfaction of reproaching him with his baseness.

“He first of all intimated to me that the sheets of my Atlas could not
be carried out of France, because the law permitted the exportation of
books only. I then enquired whether books in sheets were suffered to be
exported; and, on receiving an answer in the affirmative, I observed
that my sheets must be considered merely as unbound books. M. de P....
then declared that the favour granted by the Emperor could be extended
only to booksellers and not to authors; but M. de Montalivet, the
Minister of the Interior, objected to this partiality and silenced M. de
P..... The latter then asserted that the price of my sheets had been
considerably encreased; but it was proved by reference to two hundred
advertisements inserted in the Journals during the last ten years, that
the price had never varied. He next alluded to the intrinsic value of
the work, and affirmed that what I sold for 100 sous did not cost me
more than five or six, and started many other difficulties of an equally
absurd kind. Meanwhile time was flying; the ships were taking in their
freights, the advantages offered by the owners were diminishing, the
arbitrary valuations of the committees arrived, and I, who had
persevered in my operations in spite of every difficulty, now found
myself involved in a thousand anxieties and vexations, and thought
myself happy in escaping absolute ruin, and being able to recover my
expenses, which exceeded 80,000 francs.”

“But,” said the Emperor, “this seems almost incredible; I can scarcely
conceive how all this happened. Your speculation was exactly suited to
my taste; it would have advanced you in my good opinion; I should have
been delighted with your activity and the method of your details.
Nothing afforded me greater pleasure than to enable those around me to
make their fortunes by honest means. Why did you not appeal to me? Why
did you not expose the conduct of P....? You should have seen how I
would have treated him.”—"Sire," I replied, "such an idea never entered
my mind, the moment was critical: your time was precious. How could I
hope that your Majesty would listen to me, or that I could
satisfactorily explain an affair so complicated and delicate? How could
I convince you that I was the author of a work that bore the name of
another? What would have been thought of one so near your Majesty’s
person meddling with commercial licenses and bookselling speculations? I
felt that I was so little known to your Majesty that I dreaded the
thought of the affair reaching your ear. Thus, though I was actively
engaged in this affair, yet I exerted every endeavour to prevent its
gaining publicity, and I made up my mind to suffer the worst."

“You were very wrong,” said the Emperor. “You behaved rather awkwardly
towards me and perhaps also towards P....; I cannot otherwise explain
the unnatural malignity which he evinced towards you.”

            THE GOVERNOR’S VISIT.—HIS CONVERSATION WITH THE
                                EMPEROR.

16th.—The breach between the Governor and ourselves had been decided
ever since the occurrence of what I have already set down as his first
ill-natured trick, his first insult, &c. Our reserve and mutual dislike
encreased every day; in short, we were on very bad terms with each
other.

He appeared at Longwood about three o’clock, accompanied by his military
secretary, and desired to see the Emperor, as he wished to speak with
him on business. The Emperor was rather unwell and was not yet dressed;
however, he said he would see the Governor as soon as he had finished
dressing. In the course of a few minutes, he entered the drawing-room,
and I introduced Sir Hudson Lowe.

As I was waiting in the ante-chamber with the military secretary, I
could hear, from the Emperor’s tone of voice, that he was irritated, and
that the conversation was maintained with great warmth. The interview
was very long, and very clamorous. On the Governor’s departure, I went
to the garden, whither the Emperor had sent for me. He had not been well
for the last two days, and this affair completely upset him.

“Well, Las Cases,” said he, on perceiving me, “we have had a violent
scene. I have been thrown quite out of temper! They have now sent me
worse than a gaoler! Sir Hudson Lowe is a downright executioner! I
received him to-day with my stormy countenance, my head inclined, and my
ears pricked up. We looked most furiously at each other. My anger must
have been powerfully excited, for I felt a vibration in the calf of my
left leg. This is always a sure sign with me; and I have not felt it for
a long time before.”

The Governor had opened the conversation with an air of embarrassment,
and in broken sentences. He said, some planks of wood had arrived....
The newspapers must have made Napoleon acquainted with this
circumstance.... They were intended for the construction of a residence
for him.... He should be glad to know what he thought of it ... &c. To
this the Emperor replied only by a very significant look. Then adverting
hastily to other subjects, he told the Governor with warmth, that he
asked him for nothing, and that he would receive nothing at his hands;
and that he merely desired to be left undisturbed. He added that, though
he had much cause to complain of the Admiral, he had never had reason to
think him totally destitute of feeling; that, though he found fault with
him, he had nevertheless always received him in perfect confidence; but
that, during the month that Sir Hudson Lowe had been on the island, he
had experienced more causes of irritation than during the six preceding
months.

The Governor having observed that he did not come to receive a lesson,
the Emperor replied, "But that is no proof that you do not need one. You
tell me, Sir, that your instructions are much more rigid than those that
were given to the Admiral. Do they direct that I should suffer death by
the sword or by poison? No act of atrocity would surprise me on the part
of your ministers! If my death is determined on, execute your orders. I
know not how you will administer the poison; but, as for putting me to
death by the sword, you have already found the means of doing that. If
you should attempt, as you have threatened, to violate the sanctuary of
my abode, I give you fair warning that the brave 53rd shall enter only
by trampling over my corse.

“On hearing of your arrival, I congratulated myself in the hope of
meeting with a general who, having spent some portion of his life on the
Continent, and having taken part in important public affairs, would know
how to act in a becoming way to me; but I was grossly deceived.” The
Governor here said that, as a soldier, his conduct had been conformable
with the interests and forms of his country. On which the Emperor
replied, “Your country, your government, and yourself, will be
overwhelmed with disgrace for your conduct to me; and this disgrace will
extend to your posterity. Was there ever an act of more refined cruelty
than yours, Sir, when, a few days ago, you invited me to your table by
the title of _General Bonaparte_, with the view of rendering me an
object of ridicule or amusement to your guests? Would you have
proportioned the extent of your respect to the title you were pleased to
give me? I am not General Bonaparte to you. It is not for you or any one
in the world to deprive me of dignities which are fairly my own. If Lady
Loudon had been within my boundaries, I should undoubtedly have visited
her, because I do not stand upon strict etiquette with a woman; but I
should nevertheless have considered that I was conferring an honour upon
her. I have been told, you propose that some of the officers of your
staff should accompany me in my rides about the Island, instead of the
officer established at Longwood. Sir, when soldiers have been christened
by the fire of the battle-field, they have all one rank in my eyes. It
is not the sight of any particular uniform that offends me here, but the
obligation of seeing soldiers at all; since this must be regarded as a
tacit concession of the point which I dispute. I am not a prisoner of
war; and I cannot, therefore, submit to the regulations required in such
a situation. I am placed in your power only by the most horrible breach
of confidence.”

The Governor, on taking leave, requested to be allowed to present his
Military Secretary to the Emperor; but the latter replied that that was
very unnecessary, and that if the officer had any delicacy of feeling he
could not wish it; for his own part he would rather decline it. He added
that no social relationship could exist between gaolers and prisoners;
and that the presentation was therefore perfectly useless. He then
dismissed the Governor.

The Grand Marshal joined us; he came from his own house, where the
Governor had alighted both before and after his visit to the Emperor. He
gave a detailed account of both his calls.

He said that the Governor on his return had shown great ill-humour, and
had complained very much of the Emperor’s temper. Not relying
sufficiently on his own wit, he had recourse to that of the Abbé de
Pradt, whose work had just then passed through our hands. He had said,
“that Napoleon was not content with having created to himself an
imaginary France, an imaginary Spain, and an imaginary Poland, but that
he now wished to create _an imaginary St. Helena_.” On hearing this, the
Emperor could not refrain from laughing.

We then drove out in the calash, and on our return the Emperor took a
bath. He sent for me, and having intimated that he would not dine till
nine o’clock, kept me with him. He talked over the affairs of the day,
and dwelt on the abominable treatment he suffered, the atrocious
malignity by which it was dictated, and the brutality with which it was
executed. After a few moments of silence and reflection, he exclaimed,
as he frequently does, “My dear Las Cases, they will kill me here! It is
certain!” What a horrible prophecy!...

He dismissed me at half-past ten.

17th.—I was very ill the whole of the night; the Emperor breakfasted in
the garden, and sent for me to attend him there. He was himself dull and
melancholy, and was not at all well. After breakfast we walked for a
long time in the garden; he uttered not a word. The heat obliged him to
return in-doors about ten o’clock. He regretted excessively the want of
shade.

About four o’clock he sent to know how I was. He had just returned from
taking a drive in the calash, in which I had not been able to join him.
I walked with him and the Grand Marshal until half past five. He still
had a melancholy and abstracted air. He desired Bertrand to give us an
account of his residence at Constantinople in 1796, his journey to
Athens, and his return across Albania. A great deal was said relative to
Selim III. and his improvements, the Baron de Tott, &c. The conversation
was very interesting, but unfortunately I find in my manuscript only a
few imperfect notes, which my memory cannot now assist me in filling up.

After dinner the Emperor, who had scarcely eaten any thing, attempted to
read to us the meeting of the academy from Anacharsis. His voice and his
whole frame had lost their wonted vigour and spirit. Contrary to his
custom, he ended without analysis or observation. He retired to rest as
soon as the chapter was concluded.

                        MADAME MARSHAL LEFEVRE.

18th.—The Emperor continued indisposed. On his return from a drive in
the calash, he took a bath, and sent for me. He shewed a cheerfulness of
manner; and we conversed till half-past eight o’clock. He ordered dinner
in his own study; and he desired me to stay and dine with him. The
place, the tête-a-tête, the elegance of the dinner service, and the
neatness with which the table was laid out, gave me, I said, an idea of
comfort; the Emperor smiled at my observation. He asked me many
questions relative to London, my emigration, the French Princes, and the
Bishop of Arras. He himself recurred to the principal events of his
Consulship, and gave me some curious details and anecdotes on these
subjects. We then began to talk about the old and new courts of France,
&c. Many of the observations that were made would, if stated here, only
be repetitions, for I believe I have mentioned them before. Other
remarks that fell from the Emperor, and which are merely hinted at in my
manuscript, must remain for ever lost.

I will transcribe only the following particulars as new. I was
entertaining the Emperor with the anecdotes and ridiculous stories, that
were related gratuitously, no doubt, of Madame Lefèvre, who long enjoyed
the privilege of furnishing the drawing-rooms of Paris, and even the
drawing-room of the Tuileries, with a subject for quizzing. “I joined in
the ridicule,” said I, "like every body else, until one day I renounced
it for ever, on hearing an anecdote which proved her nobleness of
sentiment and goodness of heart.

"Madame Lefèvre, whose husband was once a private in the guards, and who
consequently filled a humble station in life, seemed to take pleasure in
reviving the recollection of circumstances connected with her former
station, and even in alluding to the laborious occupations which she had
been obliged to pursue. During their poverty, she and her husband had
been engaged in a domestic capacity in the family of the Marquis de
Valady, the Captain of the corps in which Lefèvre served. The Marquis,
who stood godfather to Lefèvre’s child, played a conspicuous part in the
desertion of the guards, nor was he less celebrated for his fanatical
zeal in favour of republican liberty; he was nevertheless a man of
generous sentiments. He was a member of the Convention, and he perished
because he opposed the execution of Louis XVI., publicly declaring that
he considered it as absolute murder, adding, that Louis had already been
too unfortunate as a King to render the infliction of any additional
punishment necessary.

"The wife of the Marquis on her return to France after her emigration,
immediately received the kindest offers and attentions from the family
of Lefèvre, who were then living in a style of considerable splendour.

"One day, Madame Lefèvre called upon her, and, in her usual strain of
language, said, ‘How little kindness and goodness of heart there is
among you people of quality. We, who have risen from the ranks, know our
duty better. We have just heard that M——, one of our old officers, and
your husband’s comrade, has returned from his emigration, and that he is
dying for want! How shameful this is. We were fearful of offending him
by offering him assistance; but the case is quite different with you. An
act of service on your part will be gratifying to him. Pray give him
this as coming from yourself.’ With these words, she presented to her
friend a rouleau of 100 louis, or 1000 crowns. From that moment, Sire,"
said I, “I felt no inclination to join in the jokes against Madame
Lefèvre; I no longer entertained towards her any other feeling than that
of profound respect. I eagerly advanced to take her hand whenever I met
her at the Tuileries, and I felt proud in escorting her through the
drawing-room, in spite of the sneers that were buzzing around me.”

We then related a number of traits of generosity exercised by the new
favourites of fortune towards the old ruined families. Among others, we
adverted to an instance of courtesy, perhaps somewhat far-fetched, in a
certain individual, who, being originally a private soldier, attained
the rank of Marshal, or General-in-chief, I forget which. One day,
during his newly acquired splendour, he assembled together at a family
dinner his former colonel, and four or five officers of the regiment,
whom he received in his original uniform of a private, and he addressed
his guests in the same terms which he had been in the habit of employing
before he attained his elevated rank.

“And this,” observed the Emperor, “was the only way to soften down the
fury of the times; for such acts as these must necessarily have created
mutual feelings of kindness between the opposite parties; and we may
naturally suppose that, during recent events, the persons thus obliged
will have returned the obligations they received, were it only for the
sake of being _quits_.”

This word _quits_ reminds me of a characteristic trait of the Emperor,
which must be noticed here.

A General had been guilty of irregularities in his department, which,
had they been brought before the tribunals, must have cost him his
honour, and perhaps his life. Now, this general had rendered the most
important services to Napoleon on the day of Brumaire. The Emperor sent
for, and reproached him with his misconduct. “However,” said he, “you
have laid me under obligations, which I have not forgotten. I am perhaps
about to transgress the laws, and to fail in my duty. I pardon you, Sir;
begone; but know that from this day forward we are _quits_. Take care of
yourself for the future, I shall look sharply after you.”

THE GOVERNOR OF JAVA.—DOCTOR WARDEN.—FAMILIAR CONVERSATION OF THE
  EMPEROR RELATIVE TO HIS FAMILY.

19th.—Doctor Warden breakfasted with me to-day. The Governor of Java
(Sir Stamford Raffles) and his staff, who had touched at St. Helena on
their way to Europe, arrived at Longwood while we were at breakfast.
Governor Raffles was well acquainted with all the Dutch gentlemen, whom
I had seen in 1810, during my mission to Amsterdam. The Emperor told me
that he would probably receive his visitors about three or four o’clock.
In the mean time, I conversed for several hours with Doctor Warden, whom
I furnished with some explanations on historical facts relating to the
Emperor, about which I supposed he intended to write.[12]

Footnote 12:

  I was sorry to find, on perusing the Doctor’s work, that he has
  totally neglected the observations and corrections with which I
  furnished him; and has strangely misrepresented the particulars which
  I communicated.

About three o’clock the Emperor received in the garden the English
gentlemen who had come from Java. He afterwards took a drive in the
calash.

On his return, about six o’clock, he desired me to follow him to his
study. He sent for the Grand Marshal and his Lady, and conversed
familiarly, until dinner time, on various subjects relating to his
family and his minutest domestic affairs during the period of his power.
He dwelt particularly on the Empress Josephine. “They lived together,”
he said, “like a private citizen and his wife. They were most
affectionate and united, having for a long period occupied but one
chamber and one bed. These are circumstances,” said the Emperor, “which
exercise great influence over the happiness of a family, securing the
reputation of the wife and the confidence of the husband, and preserving
union and good conduct on both sides. A married couple,” continued he,
“may be said never to lose sight of one another, when they pass the
night together; otherwise they soon become estranged. Thus, as long as
this practice was continued, none of my thoughts or actions escaped the
notice of Josephine. She observed, seized, and comprehended every thing.
This circumstance was sometimes not altogether without its inconvenience
to myself and to public affairs: but, while we were at the camp of
Boulogne, a moment of ill-humour put an end to this state of things.”
Certain political events which had occurred at Vienna, together with the
report of the coalition which took place in 1805, had occupied the
attention of the First Consul throughout the whole of the day, and a
great part of the night. He retired to bed not in very good spirits, and
he found Josephine in a violent rage at his long absence. Jealousy was
the real or pretended cause of this ill-humour. Napoleon grew angry in
his turn, threw off the yoke of subjection, and could never be brought
to submit to it again. At the time of his second marriage, the Emperor
was fearful, he said, “lest Maria Louisa might exact similar obedience,
for in that case he must have yielded. It is the true right and
privilege of a wife,” he observed.

“A son by Josephine,” continued the Emperor, "would have completed my
happiness, not only in a political point of view, but as a source of
domestic felicity.

"As a political result, it would have secured to me the possession of
the throne; the French people would have been as much attached to the
son of Josephine as they were to the King of Rome; and I should not have
set my foot on an abyss covered with flowers. But how vain are all human
calculations! Who can pretend to decide what may lead to happiness or
unhappiness in this life!

"Still I cannot help believing that such a pledge of our union would
have proved a source of domestic felicity; it would have put an end to
the jealousy of Josephine, by which I was continually harassed, and
which after all was the offspring of policy rather than of sentiment.
Josephine despaired of having a child, and she in consequence looked
forward with dread to the future. She was well aware that no marriage is
perfect without children; and at the period of her second nuptials there
was no longer any probability of her becoming a mother. In proportion as
her fortunes advanced, her alarm increased. She availed herself of every
resource of medicine; and sometimes almost persuaded herself that her
remedies had proved successful. When, at length, she was compelled to
renounce all hope, she suggested to her husband the expediency of
resorting to a great political deception; and she even went so far as
directly to propose the adoption of such a measure.

"Josephine possessed in an eminent degree the taste for luxury, gaiety,
and extravagance, natural to Creoles. It was impossible to regulate her
expenditure; she was constantly in debt; and thus there was always a
grand dispute when the day of payment arrived. She was frequently known
to direct her tradesmen to send in only half their accounts. Even at the
Island of Elba, Josephine’s bills came pouring in upon me from all parts
of Italy."

Some one who knew the Empress Josephine at Martinique communicated to
the Emperor many particulars relative to her family and her youthful
days. During her childhood, it was several times predicted that she
would wear a crown. Another circumstance not less curious and remarkable
is that the phial, containing the holy oil used at the coronation of the
Kings of France, is said to have been broken by Josephine’s first
husband, General Beauharnais, who, at a moment when the tide of popular
favour was running against him, hoped by this act to gain
reputation.[13]

Footnote 13:

  This story is positively contradicted. It appears that a fondness for
  the marvellous produced this fable.

A thousand stories have been told and written respecting the marriage of
Napoleon and Josephine. The campaigns of Italy explain the circumstance
that first brought about their acquaintance and their union. After
Vendemiaire, Eugène, who was yet a child, presented himself to General
Bonaparte, then General-in-chief of the army of the Interior, to request
that his father’s sword might be restored to him. Lemarrois, one of
Napoleon’s aides-de-camp, introduced the boy, who, the moment he beheld
the sword, burst into tears. The General-in-chief was moved by this
incident, and loaded the boy with caresses. When Eugène described the
manners of the young General to his mother, she lost no time in
introducing herself to him. “It is well known,” said the Emperor, "that
she put faith in presentiments and prophecies. In her childhood, some
fortuneteller had predicted that she would attain splendid rank, and
would even ascend a throne. She moreover possessed a considerable share
of art; and, after we became acquainted, she frequently assured me that
her heart beat when she first heard Eugène describe me, and that she
then caught a glimpse of her future greatness and the accomplishment of
the prophecies respecting her fate.

“Another peculiar shade in the character of Josephine,” said the
Emperor, “was her constant habit of negation. At all times, and whatever
question I put to her, her first movement was negative, her first answer
_No_; and this _no_,” continued the Emperor, “was not precisely a
falsehood, but merely a precaution, or a defence.”—"This," observed
Madame Bertrand, “is a characteristic distinction between our sex and
yours.”—"But, after all, Madam," resumed the Emperor, "this distinction
arises only from the difference of education. You love, and you are
taught to say _no_; we, on the contrary, take a pride in declaring that
we love, whether we really do or not. This is the whole course of the
opposite conduct of the two sexes. We are not, and never can be,
similar.

[Illustration:

  EUGENE BEAUHARNAIS CLAIMING HIS FATHER’S SWORD.

  London: Published for HENRY COLBURN, February, 1836.
]

“During the reign of terror,” said the Emperor, “Josephine was thrown
into prison, while her husband perished on the scaffold. Her son Eugène
was bound apprentice to a joiner, which trade he actually learned.
Hortense had no better prospects. She was, if I mistake not, sent to
learn the business of a sempstress.”[14]

Footnote 14:

  I have been assured that this circumstance is erroneous, and that
  relative to Prince Eugène inaccurate.

Fouché was the first who ventured to touch the fatal string of the
Imperial divorce. He took upon himself, without any instructions, to
advise Josephine to dissolve her marriage for the welfare of France.
Napoleon, however, conceived that the proper moment had not yet arrived.
The step taken by Fouché was a source of great vexation and trouble: it
very much displeased the Emperor, and if, at the earnest solicitation of
Josephine, he did not dismiss Fouché, it was because he had himself
secretly determined on the divorce, and he did not wish, by thus
punishing his minister, to give any check to public opinion on the
subject.

However, it is but justice to observe that, as soon as the Emperor
shewed himself resolved on the divorce, Josephine consented to it. It
cost her, it is true, a severe sacrifice: but she submitted without
murmuring, and without attempting to avail herself of those obstacles
which she might, however uselessly, have opposed to the measure.[15] She
conducted herself with the utmost grace and address. She desired that
the Viceroy might be put at the head of this affair, and she herself
made offers of service to the house of Austria.

Footnote 15:

  I received from the mouth of the Prince Primate some curious details
  concerning Josephine’s marriage and divorce. Madame de Beauharnais was
  married to General Buonaparte, by a non-juring priest, who, by mere
  accident, had neglected to procure the requisite authority from the
  curate of the parish. This, or some other informality in the marriage,
  afterwards occupied the attention of Cardinal Fesch; and, whether from
  his own scruples or otherwise, he succeeded at the time of the
  coronation in persuading the Emperor and Empress to be married over
  again by him, privately; or at least to go over as much of the
  ceremony as he thought necessary. At the divorce, the civil separation
  was pronounced by the Senate. With regard to the religious separation,
  the Emperor would not apply to the Pope, and there was no necessity
  for so doing. Cardinal Fesch having re-married the parties without
  witnesses, the Officiality of Paris declared that no marriage had
  taken place. On this judgment being delivered, the Empress Josephine
  summoned Cardinal Fesch to Malmaison, and asked him whether he could
  bear witness and sign a declaration that she had been married and
  lawfully married. “Doubtless,” replied the Cardinal, “I can bear
  testimony to the fact, and will sign the declaration,” which he
  accordingly did.

  “But,” said I to the Prince Primate, “what judgment was pronounced by
  the Officiality of Paris?”—"The only proper one," replied the
  Prince.—"What then became of the declaration of Cardinal Fesch? was it
  false?"—"Not in his opinion," said the Prince. “He had acted upon the
  Italian doctrine, by which Cardinals assume the right of marrying
  without witnesses, which however is not recognised in France, where a
  marriage is thereby rendered null.”

  It appears, however, that Josephine required this declaration only for
  her own satisfaction, and that she never made any other use of it.

Josephine would willingly have seen Maria Louisa. She frequently spoke
of her with great interest, as well as of the young King of Rome. Maria
Louisa, on her part, behaved wonderfully well to Eugène and Hortense;
but she manifested the utmost dislike and even jealousy of Josephine. “I
wished one day to take her to Malmaison,” said the Emperor; “but she
burst into tears when I made the proposal. She said she did not object
to my visiting Josephine, only she did not wish to know it. But whenever
she suspected my intention of going to Malmaison, there was no stratagem
which she did not employ for the sake of annoying me. She never left me;
and, as these visits seemed to vex her exceedingly, I did violence to my
own feelings and scarcely ever went to Malmaison. Still, however, when I
did happen to go, I was sure to encounter a flood of tears and a
multitude of contrivances of every kind. Josephine always kept in view
the example of the wife of Henry IV., who, as she observed, lived in
Paris, visited the Court, and attended the coronation after her divorce.
But she remarked that her own situation was still preferable, for she
already had children of her own, and could not hope to have more.”

Josephine possessed a perfect knowledge of all the different shades of
the Emperor’s character, and she evinced the most exquisite tact in
turning this knowledge to the best account. “For example,” said the
Emperor, “she never solicited any favour for Eugène, or thanked me for
any that I conferred on him. She never even shewed any additional
complaisance or assiduity, at the moment when the greatest honours were
lavished on him. Her grand aim was to prove that all this was my affair,
and not hers, and that it tended to my advantage. Doubtless she
entertained the idea that one day or other I should adopt Eugène as my
successor.”

The Emperor said he was well convinced that he was the individual whom
Josephine loved best in all the world: and he added, with a smile, that
he was sure she would have relinquished any assignation to attend him.
She never failed to accompany him on all his journeys. Neither fatigue
nor privation could daunt her; and she employed importunity and even
artifice to gain her point. "If I stepped into my carriage at midnight,
to set out on the longest journey, to my surprise I found Josephine all
ready prepared, though I had had no idea of her accompanying me. ‘But,’
I would say to her, ‘You cannot possibly go, the journey is too long and
will be too fatiguing for you.’—‘Not at all,’ Josephine would reply.
‘Besides, I must set out instantly.’—‘Well, I am quite ready.’—‘But you
must take a great deal of luggage.’—‘Oh, no! every thing is packed up;‘
and I was generally obliged to yield. In a word, Josephine rendered her
husband happy, and constantly proved herself his sincerest friend. At
all times and on all occasions, she manifested the most perfect
submission and attachment; and thus I shall never cease to remember her
with tenderness and gratitude.

“Josephine,” continued the Emperor, “placed the qualities of submission,
obedience, and complaisance in her sex on a level with political
address; and she often condemned the conduct of her daughter Hortense
and her relation Stephanie, who lived on very bad terms with their
husbands, frequently indulging in caprice, and pretending to assert
their independence.

“Louis,” said the Emperor, “had been spoiled by reading the works of
Rousseau. He contrived to agree with his wife only for a few months.
There were faults on both sides. On the one hand, Louis was too teazing
in his temper, and on the other Hortense was too volatile. They were
attached to each other at the time of their marriage, which was
agreeable to their mutual wishes. The union was, however, contrived by
Josephine, who had her own views in promoting it. I, on the contrary,
would rather have extended my connection with other families, and for a
moment I had an idea of forming a union between Louis and a niece of M.
de Talleyrand’s, who was afterwards Madame Juste de Noailles.”

The most ridiculous reports were circulated respecting an improper
intercourse between Napoleon and Hortense, and it was even affirmed that
the latter had had a child by the Emperor. “Such a connection,” said he,
"would have been wholly repugnant to my ideas; and those who knew
anything of the morality of the Tuileries must be aware that I need not
have been reduced to so unnatural and revolting a choice. Louis knew
perfectly well the value to which these reports were entitled; but his
vanity and irritability of temper were nevertheless offended by them,
and he frequently alluded to them as a ground for reproaching his wife.

“But Hortense,” continued the Emperor, "the virtuous, the generous, the
devoted Hortense, was not entirely faultless in her conduct towards her
husband. This I must acknowledge, in spite of all the affection I bore
her, and the sincere attachment which I am sure she entertained for me.
Though Louis’ whimsical humours were in all probability sufficiently
teasing, yet he loved Hortense; and in such a case a woman should learn
to subdue her own temper, and endeavour to return her husband’s
attachment. Had she known how to repress her temper she would have
spared herself the vexation of her late lawsuit; she would have passed a
happier life; she would have accompanied her husband to Holland, and
would have staid there. Louis would not then have fled from Amsterdam;
and I should not have been compelled to unite his kingdom to mine, a
measure which contributed to ruin my credit in Europe. Many other events
might also have taken a different turn.

“The Princess of Baden,” continued the Emperor, "pursued a wiser course.
On witnessing Josephine’s divorce, she recollected her own situation,
and used every endeavour to gain her husband’s affections. They were
afterwards a most happy couple.

"Pauline was too careless and extravagant. She might have been immensely
rich, considering all that I gave her; but she gave all away in her
turn. Her mother frequently lectured her on this subject, and told her
that she would die in a hospital. _Madame_, however, carried her
parsimony to a most ridiculous extreme. I offered to furnish her with a
very considerable monthly income, on condition that she would spend it.
She, on the other hand, was very willing to receive the money provided
she were permitted to hoard it up. This arose not so much from
covetousness as excess of foresight; all her fear was that she might one
day be reduced to beggary. She had known the horrors of want, and they
now constantly haunted her imagination. It is, however, but just to
acknowledge that she gave a great deal to her children in secret. She is
indeed a kind mother.

“Nevertheless,” continued the Emperor, “this woman, who was so reluctant
to part with a single crown, would willingly have given me her all, on
my return from the Island of Elba; and after the battle of Waterloo, she
would have surrendered to me all she possessed in the world, to assist
me in re-establishing my affairs. This she offered to do; and would,
without a murmur, have doomed herself to live on brown bread.[16]
Loftiness of sentiment still reigned paramount in her heart: pride and
noble ambition were not yet subdued by avarice.”

Footnote 16:

  How justly did the Emperor paint his mother’s character! On my return
  to Europe I was delighted to witness the literal confirmation of all
  that he had said respecting her.

  As soon as I disclosed to Madame Mère the Emperor’s real situation,
  and declared my resolution to exert all my efforts to alleviate his
  misery, the answer returned to me by the courier was, that her whole
  fortune was at her son’s disposal, and that she would earn her
  livelihood if necessary by going to service. She at the same time,
  authorised me, though I was not personally known to her, to draw
  immediately in her name for any sum that I might think necessary for
  the Emperor’s use. Cardinal Fesch also tendered his services in the
  most affectionate way; and I must take this opportunity of mentioning
  that all the different members of the Emperor’s family evinced equal
  love, zeal, and devotedness. So long as my health permitted me to keep
  up a correspondence with them, I received a multitude of letters,
  which form altogether a most interesting collection. They reflect
  honour on the hearts of the writers, and they would have proved a
  source of consolation to the Emperor, had the restrictions of the
  English government permitted me to submit them to his perusal.

Here the Emperor observed that he had still present in his memory the
lessons of pride which he had received from his mother in his childhood,
and which had influenced his conduct through life. The naturally
powerful mind of Madame Mère had been exalted by the great events of
which she had been a witness; she had seen five or six revolutions; and
her house had been thrice burnt to the ground by factions in Corsica.

“Joseph,” said the Emperor, "rendered me no assistance; but he is a very
good man. His wife, Queen Julia, is the most amiable creature that ever
existed. Joseph and I were always attached to each other, and kept on
very good terms. He loves me sincerely, and I doubt not that he would do
every thing in the world to serve me. But his qualities are only suited
to private life. He is of a gentle and kind disposition, possesses
talent and information, and is altogether a very amiable man. In the
discharge of the high duties which I confided to him, he did the best he
could. His intentions were good; and therefore the principal fault
rested not so much with him as with me, who raised him above his proper
sphere. When placed in important circumstances, he found his strength
unequal to the task imposed on him.

“The Queen of Naples had chiefly formed herself amidst great events. She
had solid sense, strength of character, and boundless ambition.... She
must naturally suffer severely from her reverses, more particularly as
she may be said to have been born a Queen. She had not, like the rest of
us,” observed the Emperor, "moved in the sphere of private life.
Caroline, Pauline, and Jerome, were still in their childhood when I had
attained supreme rank in France; thus they never knew any other state
than that which they enjoyed during the period of my power.

“Jerome was an absolute prodigal. He plunged into boundless
extravagance, and the most odious libertinism. His excuse perhaps may be
his youth, and the temptations by which he was surrounded. On my return
from the Isle of Elba, he appeared to be much improved, and to afford
great promise. One remarkable testimony in his favour was the love with
which he had inspired his wife, whose conduct was admirable, when, after
my fall, her father, the despotic and harsh King of Wurtemberg, wished
to procure her divorce. The Princess then, with her own hands,
honourably inscribed her name in history.”

To our great regret, dinner was announced; but the Emperor continued to
be very talkative during the whole of the evening. He took a familiar
retrospect of various subjects, principally alluding to the conduct of
many persons of note during his absence and at the time of his return.
He did not retire until midnight, and he closed the evening’s
conversation with the following words:—"What is doing at this moment in
France and in Paris? and what shall we ourselves be doing on this day
twelvemonth!"

                THE EMPEROR SLEEPING.—MORAL REFLECTIONS.

20th.—Mr. Balcombe had intimated to me that he was appointed to supply
us with what we wanted at the expense of the English Government; but I
wrote to inform him that, as my own pecuniary circumstances enabled me
to dispense with this favour, I was resolved not to avail myself of it.
I therefore begged that he would obtain permission from the Governor, to
receive from me a bill drawn on some person in England, which could not
be transmitted without special permission. I wished to remain free from
all obligations, so that nothing might impede me in freely exercising
the just and sad privilege of venting my reproaches and imprecations.

The Emperor rode out in the calash very early. On his return, about
three o’clock, he desired me to follow him to his chamber. “I am
low-spirited, unwell, and fatigued,” said he, “sit down in that
arm-chair, and bear me company.” He then threw himself on his couch and
fell asleep, while I watched beside him. I sat within a few paces of
him. His head was uncovered, and I gazed on his brow,—that brow on which
were inscribed Marengo, Austerlitz, and a hundred other immortal
victories. What were my thoughts and sensations at that moment? They may
be imagined; but I cannot attempt to describe them!

In about three quarters of an hour, the Emperor awoke. He took a few
turns in his chamber, and he then took a fancy to visit the apartments
of all the individuals of his suite. When he had minutely considered all
the inconveniences of mine, he said with a smile of indignation:—"Well,
I do not think that any christian on earth can be worse lodged than you
are."

After dinner, the Emperor attempted to read a part of the _Caravansêrail
de Sarrazin_. After glancing over a few of the tales, and reading a page
from one of them, he said:—"The moral of this story doubtless is that
men never change. This is not true; they change both for better and
worse. A thousand other maxims which authors attempt to establish are
all equally false. They affirm that men are ungrateful; but no, they are
not so ungrateful as is supposed: and if ingratitude be frequently a
subject of complaint, it is because the benefactor requires more than he
gives.

"It is also said that when you know a man’s character, you have a key to
his whole conduct. This is a mistaken notion. A man may commit a bad
action, though he be fundamentally good; he may be led into an act of
wickedness, without being himself wicked. This is because man is usually
actuated not by the natural bent of his character, but by a secret
momentary passion, which has lain dormant and concealed in the inmost
recesses of his heart. Another error is to suppose that the face is the
mirror of the mind. The truth is that it is very difficult to know a
man’s character. To avoid being deceived on this point, it is necessary
to judge a person by his actions only; and it must be by his actions of
the moment, and merely for that moment.

“In truth, men have their virtues and their vices, their heroism and
their perversity; men are neither generally good nor generally bad; but
they possess and practise all that is good and bad in this world. This
is the principle: natural disposition, education and accidental
circumstances produce the applications. I have always been guided by
this opinion, and I have generally found it correct. However, I was
deceived in 1814, when I believed that France, at the sight of her
dangers, would make common cause with me; but I was not deceived in
1815, on my return from Waterloo.”

The Emperor felt unwell, and retired very early.

             THE GOVERNOR ARRESTS ONE OF OUR SERVANTS.—THE
                                 BIBLE.

21st.—The Emperor continued indisposed; we nevertheless took our usual
airing in the calash. On our return, we were informed that the Governor
had been to Longwood and had himself arrested one of our domestics, who
had recently quitted the service of Deputy-Governor Skelton, and who had
a few days since been engaged by General Montholon. On hearing this, the
Emperor exclaimed: “What turpitude! what meanness! A Governor ... an
English Lieutenant-General himself to arrest a servant! Really this
conduct is too disgusting!”

The Grand Marshal joined us, and announced the arrival of a store ship,
which had left England on the 8th of March.

After dinner, the Emperor asked what we would read, and we all decided
for the Bible. “This is certainly very edifying,” said the Emperor; “it
would never be guessed in Europe.” He read to us the book of Joshua,
observing at almost every town or village that he named: “I encamped
there; I carried that place by assault; I gave battle here, &c.”

             INSTANCES OF THE CAPRICE OF AUTHORITY—PRINCESS
                        STEPHANIE OF BADEN, &C.

22nd.—In the course of this day a great deal was said about the sailors
of the Northumberland, who had been given to us as domestics, and who,
we now understood, were to be withdrawn from our service. They had,
however, been engaged by a reciprocal contract, by which both parties
were bound for the space of a year. But we are without the pale of
ordinary law. The Governor affirmed that the Admiral wanted the men; and
the Admiral said that he would allow them to remain with us if the
Governor pleased. The sailors were taken away, and soldiers were sent in
their stead; but these were also removed and sent back again, ordered
away a second time and again sent back to us. We were unable to guess
the meaning of all these changes.

While I was in the Emperor’s apartment, waiting for the announcement of
dinner, the conversation fell on Madame Campan’s establishment, the
young persons who had been educated in it, and the fortunes which the
Emperor had conferred on some of them. He particularly alluded to
Stephanie de Beauharnais, afterwards Princess of Baden, to whom he said
he was much attached. He entered into many details respecting her.

Princess Stephanie of Baden lost her mother in her childhood. She was
left in the care of an English lady, her mother’s intimate friend, who
was very rich and without children, and who confided the education of
her _protegée_ to some old nuns in the south of France, I believe at
Montauban.

Napoleon, during his Consulship, one day heard Josephine mention this
circumstance, while alluding to her young relation Stephanie. “How can
you permit this?” said he. “How can you suffer one of your name to be
supported by a foreigner, an Englishwoman, who must at this moment be
regarded as our enemy? Are you not afraid that your memory will one day
suffer for this?” A courier, was immediately despatched to bring the
young lady to the Tuileries; but the nuns refused to part with her.
Napoleon, however, instituted the necessary legal forms, and a second
courier was speedily sent to the Prefect of the district, with orders
instantly to seize the person of the young lady in the name of the law.

Owing to the circumstances of the times, such was the influence of
certain systems of education, and of the opinions which they inspired,
that Stephanie’s removal was to herself a source of deep regret; and she
beheld not without terror him who declared himself her relative, and who
was about to become her benefactor. She was placed in the establishment
of Madame Campan, at St. Germain; all sorts of masters were appointed to
superintend her education, and, on her introduction to the world, her
beauty, wit, accomplishments, and virtues, rendered her an object of
universal admiration.

The Emperor adopted her as his daughter, and gave her in marriage to the
hereditary Prince of Baden. This union was for several years far from
being happy. In course of time, however, the causes of difference
gradually vanished; the Prince and Princess became attached to each
other, and from that moment they had only to regret the happiness of
which they had deprived themselves during the early years of their
marriage.

At the conferences of Erfurt, the Princess of Baden received the most
marked attentions from her brother-in-law, the Emperor Alexander. During
our disasters, in 1813, persons who were at the head of political
affairs, dreading the result of an interview between Alexander and the
Princess of Baden, at Manheim, succeeded in depriving the Princess of
the regard of her august relative, by circulating false reports to the
prejudice of her character. When therefore Alexander arrived at Manheim,
on his triumphal march to Paris, he by no means treated Princess
Stephanie with due respect. His conduct was calculated to wound her
feelings; but it could not humble her pride. On this occasion, the
conduct pursued by the Prince of Baden reflected true glory on his
character. The most august personages surrounded him, and urged him to
repudiate the wife whom he had received from the hands of Napoleon. But
the Prince, with true nobleness of sentiment, rejected the idea,
observing that he would never commit an act of baseness, which would be
as repugnant to his affections as to his honour. This generous Prince,
to whom we did not render sufficient justice in Paris, afterwards fell a
victim to a tedious and painful illness. The Princess personally
attended her husband throughout the whole of his sufferings, performing
with her own hands all the minute services that his situation required:
her devoted attachment gained for her the admiration of her relatives
and subjects.

Princess Stephanie of Baden shed a lustre over her exalted station. She
conferred honour on her character as a wife and a daughter. She at all
times professed the highest veneration for him, who, when in the
enjoyment of boundless power, had benevolently adopted her as his child.

THE EMPEROR’S MAXIMS WITH RESPECT TO SOVEREIGNTY.—THE EXPULSION OF
  PORTALIS FROM THE COUNCIL OF STATE.—ACCIDENTS WHICH OCCURRED TO THE
  EMPEROR AT ST. CLOUD, AUXONNE, AND MARLY.

23rd.—The Emperor desired me to attend him in his chamber, about two
o’clock. He remarked that I did not look well. He was himself ill, and
had had but little sleep during the preceding night. He began to dress,
saying that he should probably feel better when he had finished his
toilet. We then went out to walk in the garden. The turn of the
conversation led the Emperor to remark that our manners required that a
sovereign should be regarded only as a blessing to his people; his acts
of severity must be overlooked in consideration of his acts of clemency;
mercy must still be held to be his chief attribute. In Paris, he
observed, he had sometimes been reproached for conversations and words
which, in truth, ought not to have escaped him. But he added that his
personal situation, his extreme activity, and most of his acts, which
really proceeded from himself, ought to have made amends for many
things. He rendered justice to the delicate tact which distinguished the
inhabitants of the French capital; no where, he said, could be found so
much wit or more taste. He reproached himself for the expulsion of
Portalis from the Council of State. I, who was present at the scene,
told him that I thought his manner was somewhat paternal. “I was perhaps
too severe,” resumed he; “I should have checked myself before I ordered
him to be gone. He attempted no justification, and therefore the scene
should have ended, merely by my saying _It is well_. His punishment
should have awaited him at home. Anger is always unbecoming in a
sovereign. But perhaps I was excusable in my council, where I might
consider myself in the bosom of my own family; or perhaps, after all, I
may be justly condemned for this act. Every one has his fault; nature
will exert her sway over us all.”

He said he also reproached himself for his conduct to M. de G—— at the
Tuileries, during one of the grand Sunday audiences, and in presence of
all the Court.—"But in this instance," said he, “I was provoked to the
utmost extreme. My anger burst forth against my inclination. I had given
G—— the command of a legion of the capital, which I was about to defend.
I afterwards learned that he rejoiced in our disasters, and invoked
them, though I did not know this at the period to which I am now
alluding. The enemy was advancing upon us, and G—— coolly wrote to
inform me that his health would not permit him to take the command;
though, as a courtier, he presented himself to me in perfect activity
and good spirits. I was very indignant at his conduct; but I repressed
my anger, and resolved to take no notice of him. He, however, on three
or four occasions sought an opportunity of throwing himself in my way. I
could no longer stifle my rage, and the bomb exploded.

“But,” concluded the Emperor, "what distressed me most of all, was the
situation of G....’s son, who was my chamberlain, and of whom I had no
reason to complain."

The Emperor then spoke of the Faubourg St. Germain, and questioned me
respecting many families and individuals belonging to it. He happened to
mention the name of Madame de S....; I observed that she had constantly
evinced great attachment to the Emperor, for which she was now doubtless
severely punished. The Emperor was not aware of the extent and sincerity
of her zeal and devotedness; though he had been very much moved by her
generous resolution of remaining with the Empress Josephine. He had, he
said, to reproach himself for not having done any thing for Madame de
S..... She must have been unfortunate in the choice of the moment at
which she solicited her husband’s nomination to the Senate.

I had, from my childhood, been intimately acquainted with Madame de
S....; and she made me her confidential friend. I related to the Emperor
the anecdote of her nomination to the post of _dame du palais_. Her
husband one morning introduced her to the Empress Josephine, who
returned her thanks for having made an application to enter her service.
This was a thunderbolt to Madame de S...., who had never dreamed of
making such a solicitation; and who, in the natural timidity of her
disposition, preserved silence. At that time I was certainly far from
approving or advising her acceptance of the post: I nevertheless
rendered her a real act of service by withholding a letter of refusal
which she had confided to me, without the knowledge of her friends, and
which might have proved fatal to the intrigues of those by whom the
affair had been brought about.

The Emperor asked me what could have given rise to this repugnance on
the part of Madame de S.... to enter the service of the Empress? I
replied that it was occasioned by the connection she had had with the
royal family. “She was right,” said he, "how could her husband think of
placing her in a situation so hostile to her feelings? A similar case
occurred in one of my nominations of Chamberlains. One individual begged
that I would be pleased to allow him to decline the honour, because, as
he said, he had been first Gentleman of the Chamber to Louis XVI. and
Louis XVIII. This was perfectly reasonable on his part; but how could I
possibly listen to such a solicitation? It was a proof of want of
delicacy in those who proposed his nomination; but what had I to do with
that? Could I enter into details of this kind? The important affairs
that claimed my attention would not permit me to descend to matters of
this sort.

“However,” continued the Emperor, "if Madame de S.... had gone the right
way to work, she might have obtained all she asked for. But she never
evinced any particular interest in what she solicited, and made
applications only in favour of individuals who had not proved themselves
very deserving; among others she recommended to my notice a man who,
after being one of the King’s Peers, wished to be made one of mine. On
my return from Elba, his daughter came to assure me that, if I would
confer this favour upon him, he would pledge himself to act with zeal in
my service, acknowledging, as he said, no interests but those of the
nation. All this was of course fair enough."

About four o’clock the Emperor got into the calash; during our usual
ride, he mentioned several serious accidents by which, at one time or
other, his life had been endangered.

At St. Cloud, he once attempted to drive his calash six-in-hand. The
horses were startled by Aide-de-camp Cafarelli inadvertently crossing
the road in front of them. Before the Emperor had time to recover the
reins, the horses set off at full speed, and the calash, which rolled
along with extreme velocity, struck against a railing. The Emperor was
thrown out to the distance of eight or ten feet, and lay stretched on
the ground upon his face. He was, he said, dead for a few seconds. He
felt the moment at which life became extinct, which he called the
_negative moment_. The first person who touched him, on alighting from
his horse, immediately revived him. He observed that the mere contact
suddenly called him to life, as, in the night-mare, the sufferer is
relieved as soon as he can cry out.

On another occasion the Emperor said he had nearly been drowned. When in
garrison at Auxonne, in 1786, while he was one day amusing himself with
swimming, a sudden numbness came over him; he lost his self-possession,
and, being alone, he was carried along by the current in a senseless
state. He felt life escape him, and even heard his comrades on the shore
call out that he was drowned, and hasten in quest of boats to recover
his body. In this case a sudden shock restored him to life. His breast
struck against a sand-bank; and, by a miracle, his head, being above the
water, he recovered himself sufficiently to swim ashore. The water was
discharged from his stomach; he regained the spot where he had left his
clothes, and, having dressed himself, he got home, while his friends
were still in search of his body.

Another time, while hunting the wild boar at Marly, all his suite was
put to flight; it was like the rout of an army. The Emperor, with Soult
and Berthier, maintained their ground against three enormous boars. “We
killed all three; but I received a hurt from my adversary, and nearly
lost this finger,” said the Emperor, pointing to the third finger of his
left hand, which indeed bore the mark of a severe wound. "But the most
laughable circumstance of all was to see the multitude of men,
surrounded by their dogs, screening themselves behind the three heroes,
and calling out lustily:—‘_Save the Emperor! Save the Emperor!_’ while
not one advanced to my assistance."

                         POLITICAL REFLECTIONS.

24th.—The Emperor went out only to take an airing in the calash. We
drove for nearly an hour and a half, proceeding at a slow pace, and
lengthened our airing by going twice over the limits of our usual ride.
The Emperor conversed on politics. The newspapers, which we had received
three days ago, furnished the subject of discussion.

In France, he observed, the patriots were emigrating rapidly; and there
seemed to be a wish to encourage their emigration, from the circumstance
of their property not having been confiscated, &c.

The Emperor thought he could perceive from the debates in the English
Parliament, that there was a reserved idea respecting the partition of
France; this was a severe shock to his feelings. “Every one possessing a
true French heart,” said he, “must now be overwhelmed with despair. An
immense majority of the population of France must be plunged in the
deepest sorrow. Ah!” he exclaimed, “why am I not placed in some remote
sphere, on a soil truly free and independent, where no external
influence could be dreaded! how would I astonish the universe! I would
address a proclamation to the French; I would say to them;—You are lost
if you are not united. The odious, the insolent foreigner is about to
parcel you out and to annihilate you. Frenchmen arise; make common
cause, at all hazards,—rally, if it must be so, even around the
Bourbons! Let the existence, the safety of France, take place of every
other consideration!...”

He thought, however, that Russia must oppose this division, as she would
thereby have to fear the growing strength and consolidation of Germany
against her. Some one present remarked that Austria must oppose it also,
from the apprehension of wanting the necessary support in case of any
attempts on the part of Russia. It was moreover observed that, in such a
case, Austria might probably serve the cause of the King of Rome, by
putting him forward. “Yes,” replied the Emperor, "as an instrument of
menace, perhaps; but never as the object of her good wishes. Austria
must have too much cause to dread him. The King of Rome will be the man
of the people; he will be the champion of Italy. Thus it will be the
policy of Austria to take his life. This will not probably be attempted
during the reign of his grandfather, who is a good man;—but the Emperor
Francis cannot live for ever. If, however, the manners of the present
age should preclude the possibility of an attempt to murder him, they
will endeavour to brutalize his faculties. Or finally, if he should
escape both physical and moral assassination,—if his mother’s cares and
his own natural endowments should rescue him from all those dangers,
then—then—" (he repeated several times, as if absorbed in reflection)
“why then—But who can calculate on the destinies of any one here below!”

The Emperor then turned the conversation to England, by remarking that
she alone was interested in the destruction of France; and in the
plenitude and versatility of his fancy, he touched on all the various
plans which she was likely to adopt for that purpose. She could not
increase the power of Belgium, he said, otherwise Antwerp would become
as formidable to her as it had been under his reign. She must, he
observed, leave the Bourbons in the centre, with only eight or ten
millions of inhabitants, and surround them with Princes, Dukes, or Kings
of Normandy, Brittany, Aquitaine, and Provence; so that Cherbourg,
Brest, the Garonne, and the Mediterranean would be in the possession of
different sovereigns. This, he said, would make the French monarchy
retrograde several ages, would restore it to its situation under the
first Capets, and would provide for the Bourbons a few centuries of new
and laborious efforts.—"But, fortunately," observed the Emperor, "before
England can arrive at this point, she will have to surmount almost
invincible obstacles,—the uniformity of the division of the territory
into departments, the similitude of language, the identity of manners,
the universality of the code, the generality of my lyceums, and the
glory and splendour which I have left behind me; these are so many
indissoluble knots and truly national institutions.

"A great nation like France cannot easily be parcelled out, or, if it
should, it will be constantly re-uniting and seeking to recover its
importance; like Ariosto’s giant, who runs after his limbs and even his
head, as they are lopped off, and after putting them on begins to fight
again." “But Sire,” said some one present, “the power of the giant
depended on the plucking out of a single hair; and, in like manner,
Napoleon may be said to be the hair on which depended the existence of
France.” “No,” resumed the Emperor, “my memory and my ideas would still
survive.—But,” continued he, “England, on the contrary, would in course
of time have become a mere appendage to France, had the latter continued
under my dominion. England was by nature intended to be one of our
Islands, as well as Oleron or Corsica. On what trifles does the fate of
Empires depend! How petty and insignificant are our revolutions in the
grand organization of the universe! If, instead of entering upon the
Egyptian expedition, I had invaded Ireland; if some slight derangement
of my plans had not thrown obstacles in the way of my Boulogne
enterprise; what would England have been to-day? What would have been
the situation of the continent and of the whole political world?”

                           VOLTAIRE’S BRUTUS.

25th.—After dinner the Emperor read Œdipus, which he admired
exceedingly. He next took up Brutus, of which he gave us a very
remarkable analysis. He observed that Voltaire seemed not to have
entered into the right feeling for his subject. “The Romans,” said he,
“were guided by patriotism, as we are by honour. Voltaire has not
portrayed the real sublimity of Brutus, sacrificing his sons for the
welfare of his country, and in spite of the pangs of paternal affection.
He has made him a monster of pride, decreeing the death of his children
for the sake of preserving his power, his name, and his celebrity. The
other characters of the tragedy, he added, are equally misconceived.
Tullia is described as a fury who takes advantage of her situation; and
not as a woman of tender sentiment, who might be led into crime by
seduction and dangerous influence.”

FRENCH COLONY ON THE BANKS OF THE RIVER ST. LAWRENCE.—THE EMPEROR MIGHT
  HAVE PROCEEDED TO AMERICA.—CARNOT AT THE TIME OF THE ABDICATION.

26th.—The Emperor sent for me about two o’clock. He was not well and was
much fatigued. We looked over a few newspapers.

In these papers it was stated that Joseph Bonaparte had made extensive
purchases of land on the north of the State of New York, on the river
St. Lawrence, and that a great number of French families had grouped
round him and were soon likely to form a numerous colony. It was
remarked that the spot seemed to have been fixed on with a view to the
interests of the United States, and in opposition to the policy of
England. In the south, in Louisiana, for example, the refugees could
have looked forward only to the enjoyment of repose and domestic
happiness; but in their present situation they must soon become a
natural attraction to the population of Canada, which was already
French, and they must ultimately form a strong barrier, or even a
hostile point against the English, who yet possess the dominion of that
part of America. The Emperor said that the establishment would in a few
years present a numerous population, distinguished for all sorts of
useful knowledge. If they do their duty, said he, they will transmit
from their colony excellent writings, victorious refutations of the
system which now triumphs in Europe. When at the Island of Elba, the
Emperor had entertained a similar idea.

He then proceeded to calculate all that he had given to the different
members of his family; and observed that they might have amassed
considerable sums of money. For his part, he said, he had nothing; if in
the course of time, he should find himself in possession of any property
in Europe, he should be wholly indebted for it to the foresight and
contrivance of some of his friends.

If the Emperor had gone to America, he intended to have collected all
his relatives around him; and he supposed that they might have realized
at least forty millions of francs. This point would have become the
nucleus of a national union, a second France. Before the conclusion of a
year, the events of Europe would have collected around him a hundred
millions of francs and sixty thousand individuals, most of them
possessing wealth, talent, and information. The Emperor said that he
should have liked to realize that dream; it would have been a renewal of
his glory.

“America,” continued he, “was in all respects our proper asylum. It is
an immense continent, possessing the advantages of a peculiar system of
freedom. If a man is troubled with melancholy, he may get into a coach,
and drive a thousand leagues, enjoying all the way the pleasure of a
common traveller. In America you may be on a footing of equality with
every one; you may, if you please, mingle with the crowd, without
inconvenience, retaining your own manners, your own language, your own
religion, &c.”

He said it was impossible that he could henceforth consider himself as a
private man in Europe; his name was too popular throughout the
continent. He was in some way or other connected with every people, and
belonged to every country.

“As for you,” said he to me smiling, “your fate seemed naturally to lead
you to the shores of the Oronooko or to Mexico, where the recollection
of the good Las Cases is not yet obliterated. You would there have
enjoyed all you could have wished. The destinies of some men seem to be
marked out. Gregoire, for instance, has only to go to Hayti, and he
would immediately be made a Pope.”

At the time of the Emperor’s second abdication, an American in Paris
wrote to him as follows:—"While you were at the head of a nation, you
could perform any miracle, you might conceive any hopes; but now you can
do nothing more in Europe. Fly to the United States! I know the hearts
of the leading men and the sentiments of the people of America. You will
there find a second country and every source of consolation." The
Emperor would not listen to such a suggestion. He might, doubtless, by
dint of speed or disguise, have gained Brest, Nantes, Bordeaux, or
Toulon, and in all probability have reached America; but he conceived
that either disguise or flight would be derogatory from his dignity. He
thought himself bound to prove to all Europe his full confidence in the
French people, and their extreme attachment to him, by passing through
his dominions at such a crisis, merely in the quality of a private man,
and unattended by any escort. But what above all influenced him at that
critical moment was the hope that impending dangers would open the eyes
of his subjects, that they would rally around him, and that he might
save the country. This hope caused him to linger at Malmaison, and to
postpone his departure, after he had reached Rochefort. If he is now at
St. Helena, he owes his captivity to this sentiment, of which he was
unable to divest himself. Subsequently, when he had no other resource
than to accept the hospitality of the Bellerophon, it was not perhaps
without a feeling of inward satisfaction that he found himself, by the
force of circumstances, irresistibly led to fix his abode in England,
where he might enjoy the happiness of being still but little removed
from France. He was well aware that he could not be free in England; but
he hoped to be heard, and then a chance would at least have been open to
the impressions which he might create. “The English Ministers,” said he,
“who are the enemies of their country, and who have sold her to
foreigners, thought they had too much cause to dread my presence. They
conceived that my opinion in London would be more powerful than the
whole Opposition: that it would have compelled them either to change
their system or resign their places; and, to keep themselves in place,
they basely sacrificed the true interests of their country, the triumph,
the glory of her laws, the peace of the world, the welfare of Europe,
the happiness and the benedictions of posterity.”

In the course of conversation during the evening, the Emperor once more
adverted to Waterloo, and described his anxiety and indecision before he
came to a final resolution respecting his abdication. I pass over a
multitude of details, lest I should be led into repetition; I note down
only the following:—

The Emperor’s speech to his ministers was the literal prophecy of all
that subsequently took place. Carnot was the only one who seemed to take
a right view of the case. He opposed the abdication, which he said was a
death-blow to France; and he wished that we should defend ourselves even
to annihilation. Carnot was the only one who maintained this opinion;
all the rest were for the abdication. That measure was determined, and
Carnot, covering his face with his hands, burst into tears.

At another moment the Emperor said, “I am not a God: I cannot do all by
my own single efforts: I cannot save the nation without the help of the
nation. I am certain that the people then entertained these sentiments,
and that they are now suffering undeservedly. It was the host of
intriguers, and men possessing titles and offices, who were really
guilty. That which misled them, and which ruined me, was the mild system
of 1814, the benignity of the restoration; they looked for a repetition
of this lenity. The change of the Sovereign had become a mere joke. They
all calculated on remaining just as they had been before, whether I
should be succeeded by Louis XVIII. or any other. These stupid, selfish,
and egotistical men looked upon the great event as merely a competition,
about which they cared but little; and they thought only of their
individual interests, when a deadly war of principles was about to be
commenced. And why should I disguise the truth? There were among the
individuals whom I had elevated, and by whom I was surrounded, a number
of proud ...!” Then, turning to me, he added, “I am not alluding to your
Faubourg St. Germain, with respect to which the matter was totally
different, and for which some excuse may be found. During my first
reverses in 1814, the greatest traitors were not the persons connected
with that party, of whom I had no great cause to complain; and, who,
therefore, on my return, were not bound to me by any particular ties of
gratitude. I had abdicated, the King was restored. They had but returned
to their old attachments, and had only renewed their allegiance.”

             STATE OF FRENCH MANUFACTURES.—ON PHYSIOGNOMY.

27th.—The Emperor went out about 2 o’clock; the weather was very fine.
The season is sensibly different from that which we had on our arrival;
the air is infinitely more pure. The Emperor was, however, very ill, and
very low-spirited. He walked to the extremity of the wood, while we were
waiting for the calash. We took our usual drive.

The conversation turned on the state of manufactures in France. The
Emperor said he had raised them to a degree of prosperity hitherto
unknown; and which was scarcely credited in Europe, or even in France.
This was a subject of wonder to foreigners on their arrival. The Abbé de
Montesquiou, he said, was constantly expressing his astonishment at this
circumstance, the proofs of which he had in his own hands, when he
became Minister of the Interior.

The Emperor was the first individual in France who said: Agriculture,
first; industry, that is to say, manufactures, next; and, finally,
trade, which must arise out of the superabundance of the two first. He
also defined and put into practice, in a clear and connected way, the
systems most conducive to the interests of our manufacturers and
merchants. To him we were indebted for the cultivation of sugar, indigo,
and cotton. He offered a reward of a million francs to the person who
should discover a method of spinning flax like cotton; and he doubted
not that this discovery would have been made. The fatality of
circumstances alone prevented this grand idea from being carried into
execution.

“The old aristocracy, those enemies to our prosperity,” said the
Emperor, “exhausted all their wit in stupid jokes and frivolous
caricatures on these subjects. But the English had no cause to laugh;
they felt the blow, and have not yet recovered from it.”

A short time before dinner, the Emperor sent for me to attend him in his
chamber. He was very unwell; he tried to converse, but he had not
strength. He attributed his indisposition to his having drunk some bad
wine, which had newly arrived. He said that Corvisart, Bertholet, and
other physicians and chemists, had frequently said that if he
experienced the least unpleasant flavour, on first tasting his wine, he
must by no means swallow it.

The turn of the conversation led him to express his surprise at the
contrast between the character of the mind and the expression of the
countenance, which was observable in some individuals. “This proves,”
said he, "that we must not judge of a man by his face; we can know him
only by his conduct. What countenances have I had to judge of in the
course of my life! What odd samples of physiognomy have come under my
observation! And what rash opinions have I heard on this subject! Thus I
invariably made it a rule never to be influenced either by features or
by words. Still, however, it must be confessed that we sometimes find
curious resemblances between the countenance and the character. For
instance, on looking at the face of our _Monseigneur_ (meaning the
Governor), who would not recognise the features of a tiger-cat! I will
mention another instance. There was a man in my service, who was
employed about my person. I liked him very much; but I was obliged to
dismiss him because I several times caught him with his hands in my
pockets. He committed his thefts too impudently: let any one look at
this man, and they must admit that he has a magpie’s eye."

While we were conversing on the subject of physiognomy, some one
remarked, that Mirabeau, speaking of Pastoret’s face, said: “it is a
compound of the tiger and the calf; but the calf predominates.” At this
the Emperor laughed heartily, and said it was strictly true.

The Emperor wished to dine alone in his chamber. He sent for me about
ten o’clock. He was then better; and he looked over several of the books
which lay scattered upon his couch. He began to read Racine’s Alexander,
of which he expressed his dislike; and he afterwards took up Andromache,
which is one of his favourite pieces.

              MARKS OF RESPECT SHEWN TO THE EMPEROR BY THE
                           ENGLISH SOLDIERS.

28th.—The Emperor went out about two o’clock. The weather was
exceedingly pleasant. We took nearly an hour’s drive in the calash. It
had been at first proposed that the Emperor should ride on horseback;
for his health was suffering from the want of that exercise. But he
would not consent to go out on horseback; he said that to ride backward
and forward within the limits marked out for him was like being confined
in a riding-school, and he could not endure it. However, on our return
home, we succeeded in changing his determination. We all attended him,
and we reached the summit of that part of Goat Hill which separates the
horizon of the town from that of Longwood. On our way back, we passed in
front of the English camp; this was the first time we had passed it
since our residence at Longwood. The soldiers immediately quitted their
various occupations, and eagerly formed themselves in a line as we
passed along. “What European soldier,” said the Emperor, “would not be
inspired with respect at my approach!” He knew this, and therefore
carefully avoided passing the English camp, lest he should be accused of
wishing to excite this sentiment. We all very much enjoyed the ride, and
returned home about five o’clock. The Emperor was a little fatigued.

For some time past, he has relinquished his regular dictations. He saw
some skittles which had been made by the servants for their own
amusement. He ordered them to be brought to us, and we played several
games with them. The Emperor won a napoleon and a half from me. He made
me pay the debt, and then threw the money to the servant who had
attended us for the purpose of running after the ball.

CORSICA.—REMARK MADE BY PAOLI.—MAGNANIMOUS CONDUCT OF MADAME
  MÉRE.—LUCIEN INTENDED TO BE GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF CORSICA.—THE FIRST
  CONSUL’S COURT.—MADAME DE CHEVREUSE.—THE EMPEROR RECEIVES A LETTER
  FROM HIS MOTHER.

29th.—For some time past, at our urgent solicitation, the Emperor every
evening made a promise that he would ride on horseback early on the
following morning; but whenever the appointed hour arrived he invariably
changed his determination. This morning, he was in the garden by
half-past eight o’clock, and he sent for me. The conversation turned on
Corsica, and was maintained for upwards of an hour.

"One’s native country," said he, “is always dear. Even St. Helena may
have charms to those who were born here.” To the Emperor, therefore,
Corsica presented a thousand attractions. He described the grand scenery
of the country, and remarked that islanders always display originality
of character, because their situation tends to protect them against
invasion, and precludes that perpetual intercourse with foreigners which
is experienced in continental states. The inhabitants of mountainous
regions, he said, always possess a degree of energy, and a turn of mind
peculiar to themselves. He dwelt much on the charms of his native
country, which, from his early recollections, was to him superior to any
other spot in the world. He thought that the very smell of the earth
would enable him to distinguish his native land, even were he conducted
blindfold to her shores; there was in it something peculiar, which he
had never perceived elsewhere. Corsica was the scene of all his early
attachments; he had there passed the happy years of his childhood,
freely roaming among the hills and valleys, enjoying the honours and
pleasures of hospitality. He traced different lines of family
connections, who, he said, extended the spirit of animosity and revenge,
even to the seventh degree; and he observed that a young woman in
Corsica thought she enhanced the value of her dowry by enumerating the
list of her cousins. He recollected with pride that, when only twenty
years of age, he had accompanied Paoli on a grand excursion to Porte di
Nuovo. Paoli’s retinue was numerous; he was escorted by upwards of 500
of his followers on horseback. Napoleon rode by his side, and, as they
went along, Paoli pointed out to him the different positions and the
places which had been the scenes of resistance or triumph during the war
for Corsican liberty. He related to him all the particulars of that
glorious conflict; and, on hearing the remarks and opinions which fell
from his young companion, he said, "Oh Napoleon! there is nothing modern
in your character! you are formed entirely on Plutarch’s model."

When Paoli manifested his determination to surrender the island to the
English, the Bonaparte family continued to head the French party, and
had the fatal honour of being the object of _a march_ of the inhabitants
of the island, that is to say, they were attacked by a levy in mass: 12
or 15,000 peasants made a descent from the mountains on Ajaccio. The
house occupied by Napoleon’s family was pillaged and burnt, and the
vines and flocks were destroyed. Madame, surrounded by a few faithful
friends, wandered for some time on the sea-shore, and was at length
obliged to fly to France. The Bonaparte family had always been much
attached to Paoli, and he in his turn had professed particular respect
towards Madame. It is, however, but just to remark that he employed
persuasion before he resorted to force. “Renounce this opposition,” said
he, “it will prove the ruin of yourself, your family, and your fortune;
you will bring irreparable misery on yourself.” The Emperor, indeed,
affirmed that, but for the chance of the revolution, the family could
never have recovered from their misfortunes. Madame, like another
Cornelia, heroically replied, “that she, her children, and her relatives
would only obey two laws, namely, those of duty and honour. Had old
Archdeacon Lucien been living at that time, his heart would have bled at
the idea of the danger of his sheep, goats, and cattle, and his prudence
would not have failed to allay the storm.”

Madame Bonaparte, the victim of her patriotism and her attachment to
France, expected to be received at Marseilles as an emigrant of
distinction; but there she scarcely found herself in safety; and, to her
astonishment, discovered that the spirit of patriotism existed only
among the very lowest classes of the people.

Napoleon, in his youth wrote a history of Corsica, which he dedicated to
the Abbé Raynal. This production gained for him some flattering
compliments and letters from the Abbé, who was the fashionable author of
the day. This history has been lost.

The Emperor remarked that, during the war in Corsica, all the French who
came to the island formed some decided opinion on the character of the
mountaineers. Some said that they were full of enthusiasm, others
regarded them as mere banditti.

It was said in the Senate at Paris, that France had chosen a ruler from
among a people whom the Romans would not take for their slaves. “The
Senator intended this remark as an insult to me,” said the Emperor; “but
he forgot how high a compliment he was thus paying to the Corsicans. He
spoke truly: the Romans never purchased Corsican slaves: they knew that
it was impossible to reduce the Corsicans under the yoke of slavery.”

During the war for liberty in Corsica, some one proposed the singular
plan of cutting down and burning all the chesnut-trees, the fruit of
which furnishes sustenance to the mountaineers. By this means it was
hoped they would be compelled to descend to the plains to sue for food
and peace. Happily, said the Emperor, this was one of those
impracticable plans which can be realized only on paper. From very
different motives, Napoleon, during the early period of his life, had
constantly declaimed against the goats, which are very numerous in the
island, and commit great ravages among the trees. He wished them to be
entirely extirpated. On this subject he had some terrible disputes with
his uncle, Archdeacon Lucien, who possessed numerous herds of goats, and
who defended them like a patriarch. In his rage, he reproached his
nephew with being an _innovator_, and inveighed against _philosophic
ideas_, as the cause of the danger with which his goats were threatened.

Paoli died in London at a very old age: he lived to see Napoleon First
Consul and Emperor. The Emperor expressed his regret at not having
recalled him. “That,” said he, “would have been highly gratifying to me.
Such an act would have been a real trophy of honour. But my mind was
absorbed in important affairs; I rarely had time to indulge my personal
feelings.”

After the Emperor’s return in 1815, when Lucien arrived in Paris, Joseph
advised the Emperor to appoint him Governor General of Corsica. This
measure was even determined on; the importance and hurry of passing
events alone prevented its execution. “If Lucien had gone to Corsica,”
said the Emperor, “he would still have remained master of the Island,
and what resources would it not have presented to our persecuted
patriots?—To how many unfortunate families would not Corsica have
afforded an asylum? He repeated that he had perhaps committed a fault,
at the time of his abdication, in not reserving to himself the
sovereignty of Corsica, together with the possession of some millions of
the civil list; and in not having conveyed all his valuables to Toulon,
whence nothing could have impeded his passage. In Corsica, he would have
found himself at home; the whole population would have been, as it were,
his own family. He might have disposed of every arm and every heart.
Thirty thousand or even 50,000 allied troops could not have subdued
him.” No sovereign in Europe would have undertaken such a task. But it
was precisely the happy security of the situation that deterred him from
availing himself of it. He would not have it said that, amidst the wreck
of the French people, which he plainly foresaw, he alone had been artful
enough to gain the port.

Some one here observed that, according to the general opinion, he might,
in 1814, have secured the possession of Corsica instead of the Island of
Elba. “Certainly I might,” replied the Emperor, “and those who are well
acquainted with the affairs of Fontainebleau will be surprised that I
did not. I might then have reserved to myself whatever I pleased. The
humour of the moment led me to decide in favour of Elba. Had I possessed
Corsica, it is probable that my return in 1815 would never have been
thought of. Even at Elba, those whose interest it was to keep me there
decreed my return by their own misgovernment and the non-fulfilment of
the engagements which they had entered into with me.”

We now reminded the Emperor of his intention of riding on horseback; but
he said that he would rather walk and chat. He ordered his breakfast,
after which we conversed for some time on the old Court, the nobility
who composed it, their pretensions, the King’s equipages, &c.; and all
this was compared with what the Emperor had himself introduced.

The Emperor then reverted to the period of his Consulship, and described
the difficulties which he had experienced in forming the kind of Court
which was then kept up at the Tuileries. On his arrival there, he was
resolved to obliterate the recollection of the manners and conflicts of
the period to which he had just succeeded. But he had hitherto passed
his life in camps: he had just returned from Egypt, and had quitted
France when young and inexperienced. He was a stranger to every one, and
he at first found this a source of great embarrassment. Lebrun acted as
his guide during the first years of his Consulship. Bankers and
money-speculators were at that time persons of the first consequence. No
sooner did the Consul enter upon his functions, than a host of these
individuals crowded round him, and eagerly offered to advance him
considerable sums of money. This conduct, though seemingly dictated only
by generosity, was not however without interested views. They were for
the most part men of bad character; and their offers were rejected. The
First Consul had a natural dislike of men of this profession. He said
that he had taken the firm determination to act upon different
principles from those of Scherer, Barras, and the Directory. He was
anxious that probity should become the main spring and feature of his
new government. The Consul was also immediately surrounded by the wives
of these money-lenders, who were all beautiful and elegant women. Indeed
a money-lender at that time seemed to regard it as indispensably
necessary that his wife should be a woman of fascinating manners: it was
a circumstance that tended materially to assist his speculations. But
the prudent Lebrun was at hand to direct the young Telemachus. He
resolved to exclude this sort of society from the Tuileries. It was,
however, no such easy matter to assemble a suitable circle around the
Consul: nobles were rejected, in order to avoid giving offence to public
opinion; and contractors were excluded, with the view of purifying the
morals of the new era. These two classes being thus shut out, of course
no very distinguished society remained; and the Tuileries for some time
presented a sort of magic-lantern, very varied and changeable.

At Moscow, the Viceroy happened to meet with some letters written by
Princess Dolgoruki, who had been at Paris at the period here alluded to.
This correspondence gave a very favourable picture of the Tuileries. The
Princess observed that it was not precisely a Court, nor yet exactly a
camp; but something perfectly new in its kind. She added that the First
Consul did not carry his hat under his arm, nor wear a dress-sword by
his side; but that he was nevertheless a swordsman. “However,” continued
the Emperor, “such is the effect of evil report that, owing to some such
expressions as these having been misrepresented to me, Princess
Dolgoruki was very unjustly treated. I ordered her, at that time, to
quit France. We thought her hostile to the principles of our government;
but we were, as it may be seen, mistaken. Madame G...., the mistress of
M. de T...., for he had not yet made her his wife, greatly contributed
to alienate from us the regard of the Russians.”

The Emperor observed that, on his return from Elba, he had experienced
far less embarrassment in composing his Court. “It was, indeed,” said
he, “all ready formed, by the ladies whom I termed _my widows_. These
were Madame Duroc, the Duchess of Istria, Mesdames Regnier, Lagrand, and
all the other widows of my first generals. I told the Princesses, who
consulted me on the method of recomposing their Courts, to follow my
example. Nothing was more natural and proper. These ladies, though still
young, were already experienced in the world; and among them were
several beautiful and fascinating women. Most of them have now lost
their fortunes; some, I have been told, are re-married, and have changed
their names;[17] so that, of all the wealth and rank founded by me, no
traces will perhaps remain; even names will disappear. If this should
really be the case, will it not afford ground for saying that, after
all, there must have been a radical error in the selections I made. But
it will be the worse for the parties themselves; they will by this means
only furnish a triumph and a ground of insolence to the old
aristocracy.”

Footnote 17:

  The Emperor had been informed that two or three of the widows of his
  most distinguished generals had lately re-married. This, however, is
  untrue.

We again reminded the Emperor of his intended ride on horseback: we
urged him not to neglect it, because we knew it to be absolutely
necessary for his health. But we could not prevail on him to leave the
garden. “We are very well here,” said he; “we will have some tents
pitched on this spot.” We began to talk about the Faubourg St. Germain,
and the Hotel de Luynes, which the Emperor termed its metropolis. He
described to us the cause of the banishment of Madame de Chevreuse. He
said, he had frequently threatened to visit her with this punishment,
and for conduct of the most mischievous and insolent nature. One day,
when urged to the utmost extremity, he addressed her as follows:—"Madam,
according to the feudal notions and doctrines, entertained by you and
your friends, you pretend to be the sovereigns of your estates! Now, on
the same principles, I may style myself the Sovereign Lord of France. I
may claim Paris as my village, and may banish from it every individual
who is obnoxious to me. I judge you by your own laws. Begone! and never
venture to return!" On decreeing her exile, the Emperor was firmly
resolved never to be prevailed on to recal her; because, he said, he had
endured much before he had decreed her punishment, and he found himself
compelled to set an example of severity to spare the necessity of
repeating it on others. This was one of his grand principles.

I told the Emperor that I had frequently visited the Hotel de Luynes,
and that I had been well acquainted with Madame de Chevreuse and her
mother-in-law, for whom I had always entertained a great regard. The
latter had evinced singular and constant affection for her
daughter-in-law, having shared her exile, and accompanied her in her
different journeys from place to place. When proceeding on my mission to
Illyria, I one night met them both in an inn at the foot of the Simplon.
To be thus able to procure in the desert the most trivial details
relating to Paris and the Court, was to them a source of unfeigned joy,
and a most unexpected instance of good fortune. They listened to me with
no less eagerness than that evinced by Fouquet on hearing the accounts
of Lauzun. Their banishment from the capital had been to them an
absolute sentence of death; it had overwhelmed them with despair!

Finally, I assured the Emperor that, for a considerable period, I had
observed the Hotel de Luynes, if not subdued, at least calmed and
reduced to something less than indifference; but our unexpected
disasters had revived its former spirit.

As to Madame de Chevreuse, who was a handsome, intelligent, and amiable
woman, with a somewhat romantic turn of mind, she had doubtless been
seduced by the charms of notoriety, or urged on by her numerous
flatterers and admirers, some of whom were very unworthy of her regard.
“I know it,” observed the Emperor; “she hoped to recommence _the
Fronde_; but I was not a minor Sovereign.”

The Musquito brig which left England on the 23rd of March, arrived with
files of the Journal des Debats down to the 5th of March, and London
papers to the 21st. On retiring to his closet, the Emperor desired me to
follow him. He began to peruse the Journal des Debats; and, meanwhile, a
letter was delivered to me from the Grand Marshal. It had just arrived
from Europe, and was addressed to the Emperor. I handed it to him. He
read it over once and sighed; and, then, having read it a second time,
he tore it, and threw the fragments beneath the table. This letter was
delivered open! The Emperor then resumed his perusal of the Journals,
and, suddenly stopping, he said, after a few moments’ silence:—"That
letter was from poor Madame: she is well, and wishes to come to reside
with me at St. Helena!" After this he continued his reading. This, which
was the first letter that the Emperor had received from any individual
of his family, was in the handwriting of Cardinal Fesch. The Emperor was
evidently much hurt by its having been delivered to him open.

MOREAU, GEORGES, AND PICHEGRU.—DIFFERENCE OF OPINION PRODUCED BY THEIR
  CONSPIRACY IN THE CAMP OF BOULOGNE AND IN PARIS.

30th.—The Emperor went out about two o’clock, and we all attended him.
He began to converse about the intelligence contained in the French
papers which he had just received, and alluded to the statues which, it
was stated, were to be erected to the memory of Moreau and Pichegru. “A
statue to Moreau,” said he, “whose conspiracy in 1803 is now so well
proved! Moreau, who, in 1813, died fighting under the Russian standard!
A monument to the memory of Pichegru, who was guilty of one of the most
heinous of crimes! who purposely suffered himself to be defeated, and
who connived with the enemy in the slaughter of his own troops! And
after all,” continued he, “history is only made up of reports which gain
credit by repetition. Because it has been repeatedly affirmed that these
were great men, who deserved well of their country, they will at length
pass for such, and their adversaries will be despised.”

Some one present remarked that it might have been thus in the dark ages
of ignorance; but that now the multitude of monuments and public
documents, the arts of printing and engraving, and the general diffusion
of knowledge, must always render truth accessible to those who wish to
come at it; and, as each party has its own historians, the thinking
reader will always be enabled to form an impartial opinion.

The Emperor then described at length the affairs of Moreau, Georges, and
Pichegru, to which I have before alluded, and of which I promised
further details. He now informed us that the man who made the first
confessions indicated, though without naming him, a person to whom
Georges and the other leaders of the conspiracy never spoke without
taking off their hats, and whom they treated with the utmost
consideration and respect. It was at first supposed that this individual
must have been the Duke de Berri; and some concluded him to have been
the Duke d’Enghien, during his momentary appearance. Charles d’Hosier,
one of the conspirators, unexpectedly drew aside the veil. A few days
after his arrest, he was seized with a fit of melancholy and hanged
himself in prison. The alarm was however given, and he was cut down.
Stretched on his bed, and while yet struggling between life and death,
he vented repeated imprecations against Moreau, and accused him of
having treacherously seduced many well-disposed men, and held out to
them promises of assistance which he never realized. He likewise
mentioned the names of Georges and Pichegru. This was the first
circumstance that excited suspicion against Georges and Pichegru; there
was previously no idea of either the one or the other having been
engaged in the conspiracy. Real, who had hastened to this sort of
death-bed confession of d’Hosier, proposed to the Consul that he should
order the arrest of Moreau.

“This event created a great sensation,” said the Emperor. “The public
mind was wrought up to a high pitch of fermentation. Doubts were
entertained of the truth of the statements made by the Government
respecting the extent of the conspiracy and the number of the
conspirators. Of the latter it was affirmed there were about forty in
Paris. Their names were published, and the First Consul pledged his
honour to secure them. He summoned Bassières, and gave orders that he,
with his corps, should surround and guard the walls of Paris. For the
space of six weeks, nobody was suffered to quit the capital without
special permission. A general gloom prevailed through Paris; but every
day the Moniteur announced the arrest of one or two of the individuals
who it was alleged were concerned in the conspiracy. Public opinion took
a turn in my favour; and indignation against the conspirators increased
in proportion as they were secured. Not one escaped.”

The public papers of the period detail the particulars of the arrest of
Georges, who killed two men before he could be secured. It appears that
he was betrayed by his comrade, who drove the cabriolet in which they
were both riding together.

As to Pichegru, he was the victim of the basest treachery. “This
circumstance,” said the Emperor, “was truly a disgrace to human nature.
He was sold by his intimate friend; by a man whom I will not name, on
account of the horror and disgust which his conduct is calculated to
excite.” We informed the Emperor that the name of this individual had
been mentioned in the Moniteur, at which he expressed surprise. “This
man,” continued he, "who was formerly a military officer, and who has
since followed the business of a merchant at Lyons, offered to deliver
up Pichegru for 100,000 crowns. On the day on which he made this
proposal, he stated that they had, on the preceding evening, supped
together, and that Pichegru, finding himself every day alluded to in the
Moniteur, and being aware that the critical moment was fast approaching,
said, ‘If I and a few other Generals were boldly to present ourselves to
the troops, should we not gain them over?’—‘No,’ replied the friend,
‘you form a wrong idea of the state of feeling in France; you would not
gain over a single soldier.’—He spoke truly. At night, the faithless
friend conducted the officers of the police to Pichegru’s door; and he
gave them a minute description of his chamber and his means of defending
himself. Pichegru had pistols on his bed-room table, and he kept a light
burning while he slept. The officers gently unlocked the door by means
of false keys, which the treacherous friend had procured for them. The
table was overturned, the candle was extinguished, and the officers
seized Pichegru, who immediately jumped out of bed. He was a very
powerful man; he struggled desperately, and it was found necessary to
bind him and convey him to prison, without waiting till he could be
dressed."

On being placed at the head of the government, the First Consul was
extremely anxious to tranquillize the western departments. He summoned
nearly all the leading men of those districts, and succeeded in rousing
several of them to a sense of the interests and glory of their country;
he added that he even drew tears from the eyes of some. Georges had his
turn among the rest. The Emperor said that he had endeavoured to touch
every individual string of his heart; but in vain, he could produce no
vibration. He found him lost to every generous feeling, and coldly
intent on his own ambitious calculations. He persisted in his
determination to command his Cantons. The Consul, having exhausted every
conciliatory argument, at length assumed the language of the first
Magistrate of France. He dismissed him, and recommended him to go home
and live quietly and submissively; and above all, not to mistake the
nature of the course he had that moment adopted, nor to attribute to
weakness what was only the result of his moderation and the
consciousness of his power. He desired him to repeat to himself, and to
all who were connected with him, that, so long as the First Consul
should hold the reins of authority, there would be no chance of safety
for any who might dare to engage in conspiracy. Georges took his leave;
but, as the event proved, not without having imbibed from this
conference a feeling of respect for Napoleon, on whose destruction,
however, he still continued bent.

Moreau was the rallying point and the centre of attraction to the
conspirators, who came from London to attack Paris. It appeared that
Lajollais, his Aide-de-camp, had deceived these men, by addressing them
in the name of Moreau, and telling them that that General was secure of
popular favour throughout the whole of France, and could dispose of the
whole army. Moreau constantly assured them that he could command no one,
not even his Aide-de-camp; but that if they killed the First Consul,
they might do any thing.

Moreau, when left to himself, was a very good sort of man. He was easily
led, and this accounts for his inconsistencies. He left the palace in
raptures, and returned to it full of spleen and malice;—having in the
interim seen his mother-in-law and his wife. The First Consul, who would
have been very glad to have gained him over to his side, once made it up
with him completely; but their friendship lasted only four days. The
Consul then vowed that he would never renew it. In fact, attempts were
afterwards frequently made to reconcile them; but Napoleon never would
agree to it. He foresaw that Moreau would commit some fault, that he
would lose himself; and certainly he could not have done so in a way
more advantageous to the First Consul.

Some days previous to the battle of Leipsic, some carriages containing
property and papers belonging to Moreau, which were on their way to his
widow in England, were intercepted at Wittemberg. Among those papers,
there was a letter from Madame Moreau herself, in which she advised her
husband to lay aside his silly wavering conduct, and to come boldly to a
determination. She urged him to assist in the triumph of the legitimate
cause, that of the Bourbons. In answer to this, Moreau wrote a few days
before his death, begging her not to trouble him with her chimeras. “I
have come near enough to France,” said he, "to learn all that is going
forward there. I have got into a real hornet’s nest."

The Emperor was on the point of publishing these intercepted papers in
the Moniteur; but there still existed in France some persons blindly
tenacious of the opinion they had always maintained respecting Moreau,
and who persisted in regarding him as a victim of tyranny. The
counter-revolution had not yet afforded an opportunity of making known
those acts hitherto disavowed, and of claiming their recompense. The
circumstance of personal enmity prevented the Emperor from executing his
intention. He thought that it would not be becoming to revive this
enmity for his own advantage, and to tarnish the memory of a man who had
just fallen on the field of battle.

The trial of Moreau and Pichegru, which was protracted for such a length
of time, violently agitated the public mind. What added to the notoriety
and interest of this trial was its connection with the affair of the
Duke d’Enghien, with which it became interwoven. “I have,” said the
Emperor, “been reproached with having committed a great fault in that
trial. It has been compared with the affair of the necklace, in the
reign of Louis XVI., which that Monarch put into the hands of
Parliament, instead of having it judged by a Commission. Politicians
have affirmed that I should have contented myself with consigning the
criminals to the judgment of a Military Commission. It would have been
ended in eight and forty hours. I could have done it; it was legal, and
nothing more would have been required of me; I should have avoided the
risks to which I was exposed. But I felt my power so unlimited, and I
was at the same time so strong in the justice of my cause, that I was
determined the affair should be open to the observation of the whole
world. For this reason the ambassadors and agents of Foreign powers were
present during the proceedings!”

One of the company present here observed to the Emperor that the course
he then adopted had proved advantageous to history and honourable to his
own character. It had furnished three volumes of authentic documents
relating to the trial.

Another individual of the Emperor’s suite, who, at the time of this
celebrated trial, was with the army at Boulogne, said that all these
events, even the affair of the Duke d’Enghien, had there excited but
little interest, and that, on his return to Paris, some time afterwards,
he was astonished to observe the sensation which they had created in the
capital.

The Emperor remarked that the public mind had indeed been highly
excited, particularly on the occasion of the death of the Duke
d’Enghien, which event, he said, still appeared to be judged of in
Europe with blindness and prejudice. He maintained his right of adopting
the step he had taken, and enumerated the reasons which had urged him to
it. He then adverted to the many attempts that had been made to
assassinate him, and observed that he was bound in justice to say that
he had never detected Louis XVIII. in any direct conspiracy against his
life, though such plots had been incessantly renewed in other quarters.
With regard to that Prince he had heard only of his systematic plans,
ideal operations, &c.

“If,” continued he, “I had continued in France in 1815, I intended to
have given publicity to some of the later attempts that were made
against me. The Maubreuil affair, in particular, should have been
solemnly investigated by the first Court of the Empire, and Europe would
have shuddered to see to what an extent the crime of secret
assassination could be carried.”

CONVERSATION RESPECTING THE SITUATION OF ENGLAND.—LETTERS DETAINED BY
  THE GOVERNOR.—CHARACTERISTIC OBSERVATIONS.

31st.—At five o’clock, I went to join the Emperor in the garden; we were
all assembled there. The conversation turned on politics. He described
the melancholy situation of England, amidst her triumphs. He alluded to
the immensity of her debt, the madness, the impossibility of her
becoming a continental power, the dangers which assailed her
constitution, the embarrassment of her ministers, and the just clamour
of the people. England with her 150 or 200 thousand men, made as many
efforts as he, the Emperor, had ever made during the period of his great
power, and perhaps even more. He had never employed beyond 500 thousand
French troops. The traces of his Continental system were followed by all
the powers on the Continent, and would be pursued still further in
proportion as those powers became more settled. He did not hesitate to
say, and he proved it, that England would have gained by adhering to the
treaty of Amiens; that such a line of conduct would have been to the
advantage of all Europe, but that Napoleon himself, and his glory would
have suffered by it. Yet it was England, and not he, who broke the
treaty.

There was only one course, he continued, for England to pursue; namely,
to return to her constitution and abandon the military system; to
interfere with the Continent only through her maritime influence, in
which she was pre-eminent. It was, he said, easy to foresee that great
calamities would assail her should she adopt any other course, and this
she would inevitably do, because all her aristocracy urged her to it,
and because the folly, pride, or venality of her present ministry caused
her to persist in the system she was pursuing.

The conversation being concluded, the Emperor returned to his study, and
desired me to follow him. He told me that a letter which had been sent
to him from England by post was said to have been kept back by the
Governor, because it was not addressed to him officially; and it was
said that a letter for the Grand Marshal had been detained for the same
reason. The Emperor observed that, if this were true, there was
something peculiarly cruel in the conduct of the Governor, in having
sent back the letters without even mentioning them to us, and without
affording us the consolation of knowing from whom they came.... A
neglect of form, he said, might easily be corrected in the Island; but
it could not so easily be observed at 2000 leagues’ distance. I told the
Emperor that a circumstance nearly similar to that which he had just
mentioned had occurred to me eight or ten days back. “A person who was
on his way to Europe had tormented me with his offers of service. I
yielded to his solicitations, and commissioned him to order me some
shoes and to get a watch changed for me, for there is no person here who
knows how to repair a watch. The Governor had forbidden the execution of
those commissions, because they had not been addressed to himself. I
have said nothing on the subject to any one, Sire, because it is a
principle with me to conceal an insult for which I cannot obtain
redress; but I shall find an opportunity to tell the Governor my mind.
In the mean time, neither he nor the person to whom I gave the
commission, has been able to draw from me a line, or a single word,
though the latter has made several attempts to do so.”

After dinner the Emperor, conversing on our situation and the conduct of
the Governor, who came to-day and took a rapid circuit round Longwood,
reverted to the subject of the last interview they had had together, and
made some striking observations respecting it. “I behaved very ill to
him, no doubt,” said he, “and nothing but my present situation could
excuse me; but I was out of humour, and could not help it; I should
blush for it in any other situation. Had such a scene taken place at the
Tuileries, I should have felt myself bound in conscience to make some
atonement. Never, during the period of my power, did I speak harshly to
any one without afterwards saying something to make amends for it. But
here I uttered not a syllable of conciliation, and I had no wish to do
so. However, the Governor proved himself very insensible to my severity;
his delicacy did not seem wounded by it. I should have liked, for his
sake, to have seen him shew a little anger, or bang the door after him
when he went away. This would at least have shown that there was some
spring and elasticity about him; but I found nothing of the kind.”

The Emperor then again resumed his conversation on political affairs,
which he maintained with so much spirit and interest, that I could have
forgotten for a time what part of the world I was in. I could have
believed myself still at the Tuileries or in the Rue de Bourgogne.

VOLTAIRE.—JEAN JACQUES ROUSSEAU.—CHARACTERISTIC DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE
  ENGLISH AND THE FRENCH NATIONS.—M. DE CHATEAUBRIAND.—HIS SPEECH AT THE
  INSTITUTE.—AFFECTED ANGER OF THE EMPEROR ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.—HIS
  PRINCIPLES ON THAT HEAD.

Saturday, 1st of June.—The Emperor sent for me. He had just come out of
his bath, where he had remained three hours, and he asked me to guess
what book he had been engaged in reading whilst in the water; it was
Rousseau’s New Eloise. He had expressed himself quite charmed with this
work when he first perused it at the Briars; but in analysing it again,
he now criticised it with unsparing severity. The rock of _la Meillerie_
being mentioned, he said he thought it had been destroyed when he caused
a road to be made over the Simplon; but I assured him that enough
remained to preserve a perfect recollection of it: it projects over the
road, and, like Leucate of old, offers a fine leap to despairing lovers.

To the noble character given by Rousseau to Lord Edward in his New
Eloise, and to the impression produced by some of Voltaire’s plays, the
Emperor ascribed, in a great measure, the high estimate which had been
formed in France of the English character. The facility with which
public opinion was governed in those days excited his surprise; Voltaire
and Rousseau, who had _then_ directed it as they pleased, would not, he
thought, be able to do so at the present time; and Voltaire, in
particular, had only exercised so powerful an influence over his
contemporaries, and been considered the great man of his age, because
all around him were pigmies.

The Emperor then proceeded to compare the character of the English and
French nations. “The higher classes among the English,” said he, "are
proud; with us unfortunately they are only vain; in that consists the
great characteristic distinction between the two nations. The mass of
the people in France certainly possess a greater share of national
feeling than any other now existing in Europe; they have profited by the
experience of their twenty-five years’ revolution; but unfortunately
that class which the revolution has advanced have not been found equal
to the station of life to which they have been elevated; they have shown
themselves corrupt and unstable: in the last struggles they have not
been distinguished either by talents, firmness, or virtue; in short,
they have degraded the honour of the nation."

A speech of M. de Chateaubriand’s has been read to the Emperor, on the
propriety of allowing the clergy to inherit. The Emperor observed that
it was rather an Academical oration than the opinion of a legislator—it
had wit, but showed little judgment, and contained no views
whatever.—"Allow the clergy to inherit," said he, “and nobody will die
without being obliged to purchase absolution: for, whatever our opinions
may be, we none of us know whither we go on leaving this world. Then
must we remember our last and final account, and no one can pronounce
what his feelings will be at his last hour, nor answer for the strength
of his mind at that awful moment. Who can affirm that I shall not die in
the arms of a confessor? and that he will not make me acknowledge myself
guilty of the evil I shall not have done, and implore forgiveness for
it?”—In the present instance, however, as somebody has observed, M. de
Chateaubriand may be said to uphold an opinion, rather than express a
sentiment of his own; and there are strong grounds for believing that,
in religion, as well as in politics, he has often been known to set
forth doctrines which had failed to carry conviction to his own mind.

On the article of religion, for instance, it is well known that before
he wrote his _Beauties of Christianity_, he had published in London
another work, of a tendency decidedly anti-religious.[18] The bookseller
to whom he entrusted the sale of this work, was Dulau, formerly a
benedictine monk of Soreze, who had sought refuge in London at the time
of the revolution. Being a man of intelligent mind and sound judgment,
he took the liberty of giving M. de Chateaubriand some good advice. He
represented to him that both the place and the time were ill chosen for
indulging in declamations against religion; that the moment had gone by
when they were favourably received; that they had become common-place
and in bad taste; and that the surest way to engage the attention of the
public would be to take up the other side of the question, and advocate,
on the contrary, the cause of religion. M. de Chateaubriand listened to
this advice, and wrote his _Beauties of Christianity_; and the event
proved that Dulau had not been mistaken in his choice of the moment, for
it is very doubtful, if the work were to appear now, whether it would
obtain the brilliant success it then met with, notwithstanding the great
merit which it undoubtedly possesses.

Footnote 18:

  Essai sur les Revolutions Anciennes et Modérnes.

The appointment of the author of _The Beauties of Christianity_ to the
embassy of Rome, was considered, at the time, as a very delicate
attention on the part of the First Consul to M. de Chateaubriand, who,
in his turn, hailed it as a first triumph, and the presage of still
greater triumphs which awaited him in the capital of the Christian
world, amongst the rulers of the church. But he was soon doomed to find
himself greatly mistaken, for people at Rome were highly scandalized at
seeing religion transformed into romance, and the Divines condemned
without hesitation _The Beauties of Christianity_, which they pronounced
to abound in heresies.

However, M. de Chateaubriand, thoroughly convinced of his own merit,
consoled himself by affecting to laugh with pity at such puerilities;
and, happening to be about this time godfather to a little girl, he gave
her the name of Atala; by this name, however, the priest positively
refused to christen her, whilst M. de Chateaubriand, in his turn,
insisted with all the obstinacy of an author and all the pride of an
ambassador. This affair made a noise, and M. de Chateaubriand laid a
complaint before the Cardinal-governor; who decided in favour of the
priest; and moreover, felt highly offended on the occasion: for M. de
Chateaubriand, fancying that his services in the cause of religion had
given him a right to assume the tone of one initiated in the secrets of
the church, concluded his argument with the Cardinal by saying: “That it
was very ridiculous that such obstacles should be thrown in _his_ way;
for,” added he, “_between ourselves_, your Eminence must know that
between Atala and any other Saint, there is no great difference.”

The Emperor was highly entertained by these anecdotes, which, he said,
were quite new to him, and the person who related them observed that,
although he could not vouch for their authenticity, yet he had no doubt
of it in his own mind, having heard them from one of the persons who
succeeded M. de Chateaubriand at the court of Rome.

In politics M. de Chateaubriand has been alternately seen amongst the
adherents and opponents of Napoleon; and the Emperor charges him, when
in his service, with malevolence and want of integrity, particularly at
the time of his embassy to the old King of Sardinia at Rome.

During the disastrous event of 1814, he made himself conspicuous by
writing pamphlets so outrageously violent and virulent, and disgraced by
such barefaced calumnies, that they excited feelings of disgust. He no
doubt must regret having been the author of them, and would not now
degrade his talents by such writings.

Some years before our disasters, the Emperor, reading one day some
fragments of this author’s works, expressed his surprise that he was not
a member of the Institute. These words acted as a powerful
recommendation in favour of M. de Chateaubriand, who hastened to put
himself in the list as a candidate, and was almost unanimously chosen.

According to one of the invariable rules of the Institute, the candidate
newly chosen was to make a speech in praise of the member to whom he was
then succeeding; but M. de Chateaubriand, persuaded, that for a man who
had once occupied the attention of the public, the surest way to acquire
celebrity was to leave the beaten track, and strike into a new path to
fame, reversed this custom by devoting part of his speech to stigmatise
the political principles of M. Chenier his predecessor, and proscribe
him as a regicide. His speech was a complete political argument,
discussing the restoration of monarchy and the judgment and death of
Louis XVI.; the whole Institute was in an uproar, some of the members
refusing to listen to a speech which appeared to them indecorous, and
others, on the contrary, insisting upon its being read. From the
Institute the dispute spread rapidly through the different circles of
Paris, which were full of the debate, and divided in opinion on the
subject; and at last reached the ears of the Emperor, to whom every
thing was carried, and who wished to be informed of every thing. He
ordered the speech to be shown to him, pronounced it to be extravagant
in the extreme, and instantly forbade its publication. It so happened
that one of the members of the Institute, who had taken a lively part in
the discussion, and voted for the reading of the speech, was also one of
the great officers of the Emperor’s household; and the Emperor took
advantage of this circumstance to manifest his opinion, by addressing
him in the following manner at one of his _couchers_:—"How long is it,
sir," said he, with the utmost severity, "since the Institute has
presumed to take the character of a political assembly? The province of
the Institute is to produce poetry and to censure faults of language;
let it beware how it forsakes the domain of literature, or I shall take
measures to bring it back within its proper limits. And is it possible
that _you_, sir, have sanctioned such an intemperate harangue by your
approbation? If M. de Chateaubriand is insane, or disposed to
malevolence, a mad-house may cure him, or punishment correct him; yet it
may be that the opinions he has pronounced are conscientiously his own,
and he is not obliged to surrender them to my policy, which is unknown
to him; but with you the case is totally different—_you_ are constantly
near my person, you are acquainted with all my acts, you know my will;
there _may_ be an excuse in M. de Chateaubriand’s favour, there _can_ be
none in yours. Sir, I hold you guilty, I consider your conduct as
criminal: it tends to bring us back to the days of disorder and
confusion, anarchy and bloodshed. Are we then banditti? And am I but an
usurper? Sir, I did not ascend the throne by hurling another from it; I
found the crown; I picked it up out of the kennel, and the nation placed
it on my head: respect the nation’s act. To submit facts that have so
recently occurred to public discussion in the present circumstances, is
to court fresh convulsions, and be an enemy to the public tranquillity.
The restoration of monarchy is veiled in mystery, and must remain so;
wherefore then, I pray, this new proposed proscription of
conventionalists and regicides? Why are subjects of so delicate a nature
again brought to light? To God alone it must belong to pronounce upon
what is no longer within the reach of the judgment of men! Are you to be
more scrupulous than the Empress? Her interests are as dear as yours can
be in this question, and much more direct, yet she has asked no
questions, she has made no enquiries; take example from her moderation.

"Have I then lost the fruit of all my labours? have all my efforts been
of so little avail that, as soon as my presence no longer restrains you,
you are ready to cut one another’s throats?" And, in speaking thus, he
paced the room with rapid strides, and, striking his forehead with his
hand, exclaimed: "Alas! poor France, long yet must thou need the care of
a guardian.

“I have done all in my power,” continued he, "to quell all your
dissensions; to unite all parties has been the constant object of my
solicitude. I have made all meet under the same roof, sit at the same
board, and drink of the same cup. I have a right to expect that you will
second my endeavours.

"Since I have taken the reins of government, have I ever inquired into
the lives, actions, opinions, or writings of any one?—Imitate my
forbearance.

“I have never had but one aim, never asked but this one question; will
you sincerely assist me in promoting the true interest of France? and
all those who have answered affirmatively have been placed by me in a
defile of granite and without outlet on either side, through which I
have urged them on to the other extremity, where my finger pointed to
the honour, the glory, and the splendour of France.”

This reprimand was so severe that the person to whom it was addressed, a
man of honour and delicate feelings, determined upon asking an audience
the next day, in order to tender his resignation. He was admitted to the
presence of the Emperor, who immediately said to him: “My dear sir, you
are come on account of the conversation of yesterday; you felt hurt on
the occasion, and I have felt not less so; but it was a piece of advice
which I thought it right to give to more than one person; if it has the
desired effect of producing some public good, we must neither of us
regret the circumstance; think no more about it.” And he spoke of
something else.

Thus would the Emperor often censure whole bodies in the person of one
single individual; and, in order to strike with greater awe, he did it
in a most solemn and imposing manner. But the anger which he sometimes
shewed in public, and of which so much has been said, was only feigned,
and put on for the moment. The Emperor affirmed that by such means he
had often deterred many from the commission of a fault, and spared
himself the necessity of punishing.

One day, at one of his grand audiences, he attacked a Colonel with the
utmost vehemence, and quite in a tone of anger, upon some slight
disorders of which his regiment had been guilty towards the inhabitants
of the countries they had passed through, in returning to France. During
the reprimand, the Colonel, thinking the punishment out of all
proportion to the fault of which he was accused, repeatedly endeavoured
to excuse himself; but the Emperor, without interrupting his speech,
said to him in an under-tone, “Very well, but hold your tongue; I
believe you: but say nothing:” and when he afterwards saw him in
private, he said to him: “When I thus addressed you, I was chastising,
in your person, certain Generals whom I saw near you, and who, had I
spoken to them direct, would have been found deserving of the lowest
degradation, and perhaps of something worse.”

But it sometimes happened, also, that the Emperor was publicly appealed
to: I have witnessed several instances of this kind.

One day at St. Cloud, at the grand audience which was held every Sunday,
a Sub-prefect, or some other public officer of Piedmont, who was
standing by my side, addressed the Emperor in a loud tone of voice and
with the utmost emotion, calling for justice, asserting that he had been
falsely accused, and unjustly condemned and dismissed from the service.
“Apply to my ministers,” answered the Emperor. “No, Sire, I wish to be
judged by you.” “That is impossible, my time is wholly absorbed with the
general interests of the Empire, and my ministers are appointed to take
into consideration the particular cases of individuals.” “But they will
condemn me.” “For what reason?” “Because every body is against me.”
“Why?” “Because I love you—to love you, Sire, is a sufficient motive to
inspire every one with hatred.” All the bystanders were disconcerted at
this answer, and red with confusion; but the Emperor replied, with the
utmost calmness, “This is rather a strange assertion, sir, but I am
willing to hope that you are mistaken,” and he passed on to the next
person. On another occasion also, on the parade, a young officer stepped
out of the ranks, in extreme agitation, to complain that he had been
ill-used, slighted, and passed over, and that he had been five years a
Lieutenant, without being able to obtain promotion. “Calm yourself,”
said the Emperor, “I was _seven_ years a Lieutenant, and yet you see
that a man may push himself forward for all that.” Every body laughed,
and the young officer, suddenly cooled by those few words, returned to
his place. Nothing was more common than to see private individuals
attack the Emperor, and hold out against him, and I have often seen him
thus sharply and warmly disputed with, and unable to silence his
opponent, give up the contest by addressing another person, or by
turning the conversation to another subject.

It may be observed, as a general principle, that, however violent the
Emperor’s actions might appear, they were always the result of
calculation. “When one of my ministers,” said he, “or some other great
personage had been guilty of a fault of so grave a nature that it became
absolutely necessary for me to be very angry, I always took care in that
case to have a third person present to witness the scene that was to
ensue; for it was a general maxim, with me, that when I resolved to
strike a blow it must be felt by many at the same time; the immediate
object of my resentment did not feel more incensed against me on that
account, and the bystander, whose embarrassed appearance was highly
ludicrous, did not fail to run and circulate, most discreetly, as far as
he could, all that he had seen and heard. A salutary terror ran thus
from vein to vein through the body social: a new impulse was given to
the march of affairs; I had less to punish, and a great deal of public
good was obtained without inflicting much private hardship.”

REFLECTIONS ON THE GOVERNOR.—EXPENSES OF THE EMPEROR’S HOUSEHOLD AT THE
  TUILERIES.—OF A GOOD SYSTEM OF FINANCE.—MESSRS. MOLLIEN AND
  LABOUILLERIE.

Sunday, 2nd.—The Emperor rode out on horseback at about eight o’clock;
he had long since abstained from enjoying that exercise. In returning
through the valley of the Company’s garden, he went into the house of
one of the Company’s Adjutants, whose wife is a Catholic; he remained
there a few minutes only, and was in high spirits. We next went to the
house of Madame Bertrand, to whom the Emperor paid a long visit. He
alluded, in the strongest terms, and with infinite humour, to the
behaviour of the Governor towards us; to his paltry measures, his total
want of consideration, the absurd manner in which he conducted the
affairs of the government of the island, and his total ignorance of the
business and manners of life. “We had certainly some reason to complain
of the Admiral,” said the Emperor; “but _he_ at least was an Englishman,
and this man is nothing but an Italian _Sbire_. We have not the same
manners,” added he, “we cannot understand each other; our feelings do
not speak the same language. He probably cannot conceive, for instance,
that heaps of diamonds would be insufficient to atone for the affront he
has offered in causing one of my domestics to be arrested almost in my
presence. Since that day all my household are in consternation.”

On returning from our ride, we breakfasted in the garden. In the
evening, whilst we were taking an airing in the calash, and making what
we called the double round, we beguiled the time in making an estimate
of the expenses of a man possessing an income of 150,000 livres in
Paris. The Emperor said that a sixth of that sum should go for the
stables, a fourth for the table, &c. I have already said that he was
fond of making such calculations, which he always had the art of placing
in a new and unexpected light.

The conversation led us to some details worthy of remark on the civil
list and the expenses of the Emperor’s household. The following are
amongst those I have remembered:

One million was allowed for the table, and yet the expense of the
Emperor’s own dinner did not exceed one hundred francs a day. It had
never been found possible to manage to give him his dinner hot; for,
when once engaged in his closet, it was impossible to know when he would
leave it. Therefore, when the hour of dinner arrived, a fowl was put on
the spit for him every half hour; and it has sometimes happened that
dozens have been roasted before that which has finally been set before
him.

The conversation now turned upon the advantages of a good administration
of finances. The Emperor spoke highly of the talents of Messrs. de
Mollien and Labouillerie, in that branch. M. de Mollien, in particular,
had put the treasury on the footing of a simple banking-house; and the
Emperor had continually under his eyes, in a small book for that
purpose, a complete statement of the revenue, the receipt, expenditure,
arrears, resources, &c.

The Emperor had in his cellars at the Tuileries, he added, as much as
400 millions in gold, which were entirely his own property; so much so
indeed that no other account of it existed but in a small book in the
hands of his private Treasurer. All this treasure disappeared by
degrees, and was applied to the expenses of the Empire, particularly at
the time of our disasters. “How could I think,” said he, “of keeping
anything for myself! I had identified myself with the nation.” He
further added that _he_ had sent 2000 millions in specie into France,
without reckoning what private individuals might have brought on their
own account.

The Emperor said that he had been much hurt at the conduct of M. de
Labouillerie, who, being at Orleans in 1814, in charge of several
millions belonging to him (Napoleon), his own private property, had
taken them to the Count d’Artois in Paris instead of carrying them to
Fontainbleau, as he was in duty and in conscience bound to do. “And yet
Labouillerie was not a bad man,” said the Emperor. “I had both loved him
and esteemed him. On my return in 1815 he earnestly entreated me to see
him and hear what he had to say in his own defence; he no doubt would
have proved that his fault arose from his ignorance, and not from his
heart. He knew me; he was aware that, if he could approach me, the
affair would be settled with a few angry expressions on my part; but I
also knew my own weakness, I was resolved not to take him into my
service again, and therefore refused to admit him. It was the only way
in which I could hope at that moment to hold out against him and several
others. Esteve, the predecessor of Labouillerie, would not have acted in
that manner; he was entirely devoted to my person; he would have brought
my treasure to Fontainbleau at all hazards; or if he had failed in the
attempt, he would have thrown it into a river, or distributed it in
various places, rather than give it up.”

                        ON WOMEN, &C.—POLYGAMY.

Monday, 3rd.—The Emperor, after having been three hours in his bath,
went out at about five o’clock, to take a walk in the garden. He was
taciturn and dejected, and wore the appearance of suffering. We
afterwards drove out in the calash, and by degrees he became more
cheerful and talkative.

On our return, he continued to walk for some time; and in order to
engage in a playful warfare with one of the ladies present, he affected
to declaim against women. “We men of the West,” said he, winking aside
to us at the same time, to let us know that he was jesting, “know
nothing at all about the matter, we have acted most unwisely in treating
women too well; we have imprudently allowed them to rank almost as our
equals. In the East they have more sense and judgment; _there_ women are
pronounced to be the actual property of man; and so indeed they are.
Nature has made them our slaves, and it is only by presuming upon our
folly that they can aspire to govern us, and by abusing the advantages
which they possess, that they succeed in fascinating us and establishing
their dominion over us. For one woman that inspires us with proper
sentiments, there are a hundred who lead us into errors.” He then went
on to express his approbation of the maxims of the oriental nations,
highly commended the practice of polygamy, which he considered to be
that pointed out by nature, and displayed considerable ingenuity and
fertility of invention in the choice and number of arguments which he
adduced in support of his opinion. “Woman,” said he, "is given to man to
bear children to him; but one woman cannot suffice to one man for that
purpose, for a woman cannot fulfil the duties of a wife during the
period of her gestation, whilst she suckles her child, or when she is
ill: and she ceases altogether to be a wife when she is no longer able
to bear children. To man, on the contrary, nature has opposed no such
obstacles at any period of his existence; a man should therefore have
several wives.

“After all,” continued he, smiling significantly, “what have you to
complain of, ladies? have we not acknowledged that you possess a soul?
though certain philosophers, you know, have entertained doubts on this
point. You aim at equality, but _that_ is madness: woman is our
property, we are not hers; for it is she that gives us children, and not
we to her; she is therefore the property of man, in the same manner as
the fruit-tree is the property of the gardener. If the husband is
unfaithful to his wife, and he confesses his fault and repents of it,
there is an end of the matter; no trace of it is left: the wife is
angry, forgives, or becomes reconciled; and not unfrequently is a gainer
on the occasion. But the case is widely different when the wife is
unmindful of the marriage vow; it is of no avail for her to repent; the
consequences of her guilt are incalculable, the mischief irreparable,
she must never, she can never, confess it. You will therefore agree with
me, Ladies, that it can only be an error of judgment, the want of
education, or the preponderance of vulgar notions, that can prompt a
wife to believe herself the equal, in every respect, of her husband.
There is, however, nothing disparaging in the inequality; each sex has
its attributes and its duties; your attributes, Ladies, are beauty,
grace, fascination; your duties, submission, and dependance, &c.”

After dinner, the Emperor desired my son to bring him the Memoirs of the
Chevalier de Grammont and a volume of Voltaire’s plays. Having, as he
said, imposed on himself the task of remaining up till eleven o’clock,
the Emperor read for some time the Memoirs, observing that a very little
could be rendered amusing when seasoned with genuine wit. He afterwards
turned over Mahomet, Semiramis, and other plays of Voltaire’s, pointing
out their faults and blemishes, and concluding, as he generally did,
that Voltaire had no knowledge either of affairs, men, or the real
passions of human nature.

                THE EMPEROR RESUMES THE DICTATION OF HIS
                              MEMOIRS, &C.

Tuesday, 4th.—The Emperor sent for me at about four o’clock to take a
ride in the calash. He told me he had at last been dictating again, and
that what had been done would not be found devoid of interest. He added
that he had been during the whole morning very much out of humour: that
he had at first attempted to go out at about one o’clock, but that he
had found himself compelled to return into the house, pursued by disgust
and ennui; and that, not knowing what to do with himself, he had thought
of resuming his dictations.

The Emperor had long since ceased to apply himself regularly to this
occupation. Several months had already elapsed since my Campaigns of
Italy were finished; the Campaign of Egypt which he had dictated to
General Bertrand, was also completed; and General Gourgaud had been very
ill. All these circumstances had concurred to cause interruptions, which
had engendered disgust; the Emperor had not proceeded further, and could
not summon courage to begin again.

I took advantage of what he had just said, to represent to him that to
dictate was, for him, the surest, the only remedy against _ennui_, the
only way in which he could beguile the tedious hours: and for us, the
means of obtaining the inestimable advantage of being put in possession
of treasures, in the existence of which the honour and glory of France
were equally interested. I urged, that it was of paramount importance
that he should continue to write his own history. “Each of us,” said I,
"would willingly give his life to obtain it; it was due to his memory,
to his family, to us. Where would his son find the events of his
father’s life faithfully recorded? What pen could be found equal to the
task of retracing them in a manner worthy of the subject? and yet,
without such invaluable documents, how many events would be buried with
Napoleon, and remain for ever unknown! We who surrounded him formerly,
what did we _then_ know? how much had we not learnt here," &c. &c. The
Emperor replied that he would continue his Memoirs, and consulted me as
to the plan to be followed in digesting them; should they appear as a
history? or as annals? He discussed the point for a long time, but
without coming to any conclusion.

At dinner he said, “I have to-day been severely reprimanded on account
of my idleness; I am therefore going to take to my task again, and
embrace several periods at the same time: each of you shall have his
share. Did not Herodotus,” said he, looking at me, “give to his books
the names of the muses? I intend that each of mine shall bear the name
of one of you. Even little Emmanuel shall give his to one of them. I
will begin the history of the Consulate with Montholon, Gourgaud shall
record the events of some other period, or detached battles; and little
Emmanuel shall prepare the documents and materials of the epoch of the
coronation.”

MILITARY SCHOOLS.—PLAN OF EDUCATION PRESCRIBED BY THE EMPEROR.—HIS
  INTENTIONS IN BEHALF OF VETERANS.—CHANGES INTRODUCED IN THE MANNERS OF
  THE CAPITAL.

Wednesday, 5th.—The Emperor went out at about four o’clock; he had been
three hours in his bath, and did not feel well. Yet the weather was
delightful; it was like a fine afternoon in Europe. We walked until we
came up to the calash, and then took our usual drive. Our conversation
turned upon the military school of Paris before the Revolution, and we
contrasted the footing of luxury upon which we were placed at that
school with the severe discipline introduced by the Emperor in these
establishments during his reign.

At the military school of Paris we were treated in every respect like
officers of fortune, boarded and waited upon in a style of great
magnificence, greater indeed than the circumstances of most of our
families warranted, and greater than most of us could hope to be able to
keep up in after-life. The Emperor had been anxious, he said, to avoid
falling into this error; he had wished, above all, that his young
officers, who were one day to command soldiers, should begin by being
soldiers themselves, and learn by experience all the technical details
of the service: a system of education, he added, which must ever prove
an immense advantage to an officer in the course of his future career,
by enabling him to follow them and to enforce the observance of those
details in others who are placed under his orders. It was on this
principle that, at St. Germain, the young students were obliged to groom
their own horses, taught to shoe them, &c. The same spirit presided over
the regulations at St. Cyr: there several pupils were lodged together in
one large apartment, a common mess was provided for all
indiscriminately, &c.: yet the attention paid to these particulars was
not suffered to interfere with the care bestowed upon the instruction
necessary to qualify them for their future career: in short, they did
not leave St. Cyr before they had really earned the rank of officers,
and were found capable of leading and commanding soldiers. “And it must
be admitted,” the Emperor observed, “that if the young men who passed
from that institution, at its origin, into different corps of the army,
were at first viewed with jealousy, ample justice was soon rendered to
their discipline and to their abilities.”

The establishments of Ecouen, St. Denis and others, which the benevolent
solicitude of Napoleon had created for the daughters of members of the
legion of honour, were conducted upon principles of a similar nature.
Some of the rules, made by the Emperor himself, ordered that every
article for the use of the institution should be made in the house and
by the hands of the pupils themselves, and forbade every species of
luxury, extravagance in dress, and plays; the object being, he said, to
form good housewives and respectable women.

Public opinion had given to Napoleon, at the time of his elevation, the
reputation of a man of a harsh disposition and void of sensibility; yet
it is certain that no sovereign ever acted more from the impulse of
genuine feelings than he did; but, from a peculiar turn of mind, he
concealed all emotions of the heart with as much care as others take to
display them.

He had adopted all the children of the soldiers and officers killed at
Austerlitz, and with him such an act was not one of mere form; he had
provided for them all.

I heard the following anecdote from a young man who has related it to me
since my return to Europe, with tears of gratitude. Having been
fortunate enough, when yet very young, to attract the Emperor’s notice
by some signal proof of his attachment; Napoleon asked him what
profession he would wish to embrace; and, without waiting for his
answer, pointed out one himself. The young man observed that his
father’s fortune was not sufficient to allow him to follow it. “What
signifies that?” replied the Emperor hastily: “Am I not also your
father?” Those persons who have known Napoleon in his private life, who
have lived near his person, can relate a thousand traits of the same
kind.

He had done much for the army and the veterans, and proposed to do much
more: every day some new thought tending to that object occupied his
mind. The plan of a decree was one day laid before us in the Council of
State, proposing that in future all vacant situations in the customs,
the collection of the revenue, and the excise, should be given to
wounded soldiers, or to veterans capable of filling them, from the
private up to the highest ranks in the army. This plan being coldly
received, the Emperor addressed one of those who opposed it in his usual
manner, urging him to discuss the question freely, and state his opinion
without reserve. “Sire,” answered M. Malouet, “my objection is that I
fear the other classes of the nation will feel themselves aggrieved in
seeing the army preferred to them.” “Sir,” replied the Emperor warmly,
“you make a distinction which does not exist; the army no longer forms a
separate class of the nation. In the situation in which we are now
placed no member of the state is exempt from being a soldier; to follow
a military career is no longer a matter of choice, it is one of
necessity. The greatest number of those who are engaged in that career
have been compelled to abandon their own profession against their will,
it is therefore but justice that they should receive some kind of
compensation for it.”—"But," again observes the member who opposed the
plan, “will it not be inferred that your majesty intends that in future
almost all vacant situations shall be given to soldiers?”—

“And such is indeed my intention,” said the Emperor. “Sir, the only
question is, whether I have the right to do so, and whether I thereby
commit an act of injustice? Now the constitution gives me the nomination
to all places, and I think it a principle of strict equity that those
who have suffered most have the greatest claims to be indemnified.”
Then, raising his voice, he added, “Gentlemen, war is not a profession
of ease and comfort: quietly seated on your benches here you know it
only by reading our bulletins, or by hearing of our triumphs. You know
nothing of our nightly watches, our forced marches, the sufferings and
privations of every kind to which we are exposed: but I do know them,
because I witness them, and sometimes share in them.”

This plan, however, like many others, was at last abandoned, after
having been several times under discussion and variously modified; and
the beneficent intentions of the Emperor were, I believe, not even known
to the public, though he had appeared to take a lively interest in the
passing of this decree, and had defended it in its most minute details.

Amongst the objections started against this plan, at the commencement of
the discussion, and the arguments to which they gave rise, were the
following:—"Would your majesty, for instance, give such situations to a
soldier who could not read?"—"Why not?"—"But how would he be able to
discharge his duties? how could he keep his accounts?"—"Sir, he would
apply to his neighbour, he would send for his relations, and the benefit
intended for one would be felt by many. Besides, I do not hold your
objection to be valid; we have only to stipulate that the man appointed
shall be qualified to fill the situation," &c.

Towards evening, the Emperor sent for me to his own room. I found him
alone, near a small fire, but almost in the dark, the lights being
placed in the next apartment. This obscurity, he said, was in harmony
with his melancholy. He was silent and dejected.

After dinner the Emperor took up the Memoirs of the Chevalier de
Grammont, but found himself unable to continue to read them.

A discussion then arose upon the manner in which time was spent in
Paris. The habits of society in former times and the present were
reviewed. The Emperor said he had thought much and often upon the means
of introducing variety into the pleasures of society. He had had
assemblies at Court, plays, excursions to Fontainbleau, but they had
only produced the effect, he said, of inconveniencing the people at
Court without influencing the circles of the metropolis. There was not
yet a sufficient degree of cohesion in those heterogeneous parts for
them to re-act upon each other with due effect: but this, he affirmed,
would have been brought about in the course of time. It was observed to
him that he had much contributed to shorten the evenings at Paris, as
all persons employed by government, having a great deal to do, and being
obliged to rise very early, were under the necessity of retiring early.
“It caused, however, great surprise in Paris,” said the Emperor,
“produced quite a revolution in manners, and almost stirred up a
sedition in the circles of the metropolis, when the First Consul
required that boots should be relinquished for shoes, and that some
little attention should be bestowed upon dress to appear in company.”

The Emperor dwelt with great pleasure upon the causes of the
good-breeding and amiable manners which distinguished society in our
younger days. He defined particularly those points which contributed to
render intimacy agreeable, such as a slight tinge of flattery on both
sides, or, at least, an opposition seasoned with delicacy and
politeness, &c.

REPUGNANCE TO PHYSIC.—GIL BLAS.—GENERAL BIZANET.—HEROIC DEEDS OF FRENCH
  VALOUR.—REFLECTIONS, &C.

Thursday, 6th.—I did not see the Emperor before six o’clock; being
indisposed, he had remained in his room, and had not eaten any thing the
whole day. He said that he found himself unwell, and was amusing himself
by looking over some prints of London which the Doctor had lent him. The
Doctor had had the honour of seeing the Emperor in the course of the
day, and had made him laugh. “Hearing that I was not well,” said
Napoleon, “he claimed me as his prey, by immediately advising me to take
some medicine; medicine to me, who, to the best of my recollection,
never took any in the whole course of my life!”

It was now past seven: the Emperor said that a man who felt hungry was
not very ill. He called for something to eat, and a chicken was brought
to him, which he highly relished. This revived his spirits a little, he
became more talkative, and made remarks on several French novels. He had
been employed the greater part of the day in reading Gil Blas, which he
thought full of wit; but the hero and all his companions, he said, had
deserved to be sent to the galleys. He then turned over a chronological
register, and stopped at the brilliant affair of Bergenopzoom, commanded
by General Bizanet.

“How many gallant actions,” said the Emperor, “have been either
forgotten in the confusion of our disasters, or overlooked in the number
of our exploits. The affair of Bergenopzoom is one of these. A competent
garrison for that town would have been probably from eight to ten
thousand men, but it did not then contain more than two thousand seven
hundred. An English General, favoured by the darkness of the night, and
by the intelligence which he kept up with the inhabitants, had succeeded
in penetrating into it, at the head of four thousand eight hundred
chosen men. They are in the town, the inhabitants are on their side, but
nothing can triumph over French valour! A desperate engagement takes
place in the streets, and nearly the whole of the English troops are
killed or remain prisoners. That is undoubtedly, exclaimed the Emperor,
a gallant action! General Bizanet is a gallant officer!”

It is certain, as Napoleon had observed, that, in the last moments of
the Empire, numberless heroic deeds and historical traits have been
overlooked in the confusion of our disasters, or have disappeared in the
abyss of our misfortunes. Such are the extraordinary and singular
defence of Huningen, by the intrepid Barbanegre; and the gallant
resistance of General Teste at Namur, where, in an open town, with a
handful of brave fellows, he stopped short the rapid advance of the
Prussians, and facilitated the re-entry of Grouchy, without suffering
any loss. Such was the brilliant expedition of the brave Excelmans in
Versailles, which might have produced most important results, if it had
been supported as it had been decided that it should be; and several
others.

At any rate, these noble deeds at that critical period, have shed lustre
on the ranks of the army rather than on its principal leaders. It would
have been well, if, at the moment of that terrible catastrophe, during
that fatal crisis, some of our first generals had again exhibited some
of those noble acts of courage, those signal efforts, which marked our
first triumphs, and which, under Napoleon’s reign, had become almost a
national habit; whatever the result might have been, the attempt would
have been a source of consolation to our glory, and France would have
contemplated with satisfaction the heroic convulsions of her agony. We
ought not to have terminated our career by common actions.

At that calamitous period, we had more troops abroad than at home:
Dresden contained an army: a second army was shut up in Hamburg; a third
in Dantzick; and a fourth might have been easily collected by bringing
together the immense number of our soldiers, which formed several other
intermediate garrisons. All the efforts of our enemies tended only to
keep these brave troops separated from France, and to cut off their
return. Oh! that some one of their leaders had been inspired with the
thought to take advantage of those circumstances to liberate the sacred
soil, by attacking boldly that of the enemy, and obliging him thus to
retrace his steps! Would it have been impossible to unite those
different corps?

Would not the union of the garrisons of Dresden, Torgau, Magdeburg,
Hamburg, have produced a formidable army in the rear of the enemy,
capable of breaking through his line, or of placing him in a most
critical situation? Might not such an army have taken possession of
Berlin, liberated the garrisons on the Oder, gone to the assistance of
Dantzick, raised an insurrection in Poland, so well prepared for it, or,
in short, done something bold, striking, unexpected, in a word, worthy
of us?

What then was required to give a favourable turn to our destinies? the
most trifling event, before the Allies entered France, would have
sufficed to enable us to conclude a peace on reasonable terms at
Francfort; and, at a later period, when the enemy was already in our own
territory, the slightest cause of uneasiness in his rear at the time of
the heroic actions of Champaubert, Montmirail, Vauchamp, Craon,
Monterau, would probably have determined the hasty retreat of the
Allies, and insured our triumph, and perhaps their destruction. And, if
the general who had thus dared to devote himself had failed in the
attempt, it would not have been the worse for us, since we have
ultimately fallen; and he, in the spirit of our national character,
would have gained the reputation of a hero and rendered his name
immortal.

Instead of this, about one hundred thousand men were lost to France, by
tamely adhering to the letter of their instructions; a system which we
had long since abandoned. But perhaps I speak inconsiderately and
without due knowledge of the subject; perhaps local circumstances and
objections of which I am totally ignorant might be adduced as conclusive
answers against me; such as the health of the troops, the state of
destitution in which they were; the non-reception of orders from the
Emperor, who did endeavour to give some orders of that kind; the fear of
deranging the main plan; the dread of incurring too great a
responsibility, &c. But is it not rather that the source of these high
conceptions, and the cause of their heroic execution, were to be found
in Napoleon alone, and that where _he_ was not, as it may have been
often observed, affairs were suffered to sink to the level of their
ordinary course? Be that as it may, something of the kind was however
suggested to the General commanding the army in Dantzick, at the time of
the capitulation of that town. The idea came from an officer of inferior
rank, it is true, but from one whose courage and intrepidity, and the
success with which they had been crowned, entitled him perhaps to give
such an opinion: it was Captain de Chambure, the leader of that renowned
company of partisans which covered itself with glory during the siege.
This company had been formed for that particular service, of one hundred
picked men chosen out of the most notoriously intrepid, throughout all
the corps of the army; it fulfilled, and even exceeded, all the
expectations which it had raised; and the besiegers, struck with terror
at its exploits, honoured it with the epithet of _infernal_. It would
sometimes land at night in the rear of the Russian army, slaughter their
sentinels, spike their guns, burn their magazines, destroy their parks,
threaten the lives even of the generals, and return to the town through
the enemies’ camp over the bodies of all who opposed its passage. These
facts and several others are recorded in the general orders of that
army.

It cannot be denied that, in ordinary times, in the days that preceded
ours, every one of these actions would have been sufficient to
immortalize every individual who had a share in them, and that even
amidst the wonders of our age they are deserving of particular notice.
On his return from Elba, Napoleon was desirous of seeing the brave
Chambure, who was covered with wounds: he was accordingly introduced to
the Emperor by the Minister of War, and was immediately appointed to the
command of a partisan corps on the eastern frontiers of France, where he
again shewed himself worthy of his fame. Two English officers fell into
his hands in the very heart of France, and at the moment of the violent
exasperation produced by the recent disasters which had again befallen
us. De Chambure protected these officers from the fury of his own
soldiers, and preserved their equipages and even their baggage. Will it
be believed? Some time afterwards, this officer, whose courage, loyalty,
and above all, whose noble conduct were deserving of the highest
recompense, was by a French tribunal condemned to the galleys for life,
and to be branded and exposed in the pillory, for having, it was said,
stopped and robbed two officers of the enemy’s army on the highway! Such
is the justice of party-spirit! Such the monstrous aberrations to which
the judgment and the consciences of men can be reconciled by the
effervescence of civil commotions!

Under these circumstances, no alternative was left to Colonel de
Chambure but a speedy retreat from his own country: it was in vain that
from his exile he endeavoured to make the truth known; it was in vain
that the two English officers gave the most extensive publicity to the
testimonials of their gratitude: a considerable time elapsed before
Colonel de Chambure could seize the opportunity of a moment of political
calm, to deliver up his person to the tribunals, and call for a revision
of his trial.—That revision took place, and this time the result was a
declaration that there were not even any grounds of accusation against
him! This is indeed one of the peculiar signs of the times!

THE EMPEROR’S IMAGINARY PLANS FOR THE FUTURE.—NAPOLEON LITTLE KNOWN EVEN
  BY HIS HOUSEHOLD—HIS RELIGIOUS OPINIONS.

From Friday 7th to Saturday 8th.—During a long private conversation,
this morning, the Emperor reverted to all the horrors of our present
situation, and enumerated all the chances which hope suggested of better
days.

After his remarks on these topics, which I cannot repeat here, he gave
the rein to his imagination, and said that the only countries in which
he could reside for the future were England and America. His
inclination, he added, prompted for America, because _there_ he should
be really free, and independence and repose were all he now sighed for:
then followed an imaginary plan of life: he fancied himself with his
brother Joseph, in the midst of a little France, &c. Yet policy, he
observed, might decide for England. He was bound perhaps to remain a
slave to events—he owed the sacrifice of himself to a nation which had
done more for him than he had done for it in return; and then followed
another imaginary plan for the future.

In the course of our subsequent conversation, the Emperor could not
sufficiently express his surprise at the conviction, which he had
obtained, that several of those who surrounded him and formed his Court,
believed the greatest part of the many absurdities and idle reports
which had been circulated respecting himself, and that they even went so
far as to doubt the falsehood of the enormities with which his
reputation had been stained.—Thus we believed that he wore armour in the
midst of us—was addicted to the superstition of presentiments and
fatality—subject to fits of madness or of epilepsy—that he had strangled
Pichegru—caused a poor English captain’s throat to be cut, &c. We could
not but admit that his invective against us on the occasion was merited;
all we could allege in our defence was that many circumstances had
concurred to leave those who formerly surrounded his person as much in
ignorance on the subject as the bulk of the nation could be. We
frequently saw him, I said, but we never held any communication with
him: every thing remained a mystery for us. Not a voice was raised to
refute, whilst many in secret, and some that were nearest to his person,
either through perverseness, or with bad intentions, seemed ever busy in
dealing out insinuations. As for myself, I candidly confessed that I had
not formed a just idea of his disposition before I came here, although I
could congratulate myself that I had certainly guessed him in part. “And
yet,” he observed in reply, “_you_ have often seen me and heard me in
the Council of State.”

In the evening, after dinner, the conversation turned upon religion. The
Emperor dwelt on the subject at length. The following is a faithful
summary of his arguments; I give it as being quite characteristic upon a
point which has probably often excited the curiosity of many.

The Emperor, after having spoken for some time with warmth and
animation, said: “Every thing proclaims the existence of a God, _that_
cannot be questioned; but all our religions are evidently the work of
men. Why are there so many?—Why has ours not always existed?—Why does it
consider itself exclusively the right one?—What becomes in that case of
all the virtuous men who have gone before us?—Why do these religions
revile, oppose, exterminate one another?—Why has this been the case ever
and every where?—Because men are ever men; because priests have ever and
every where introduced fraud and falsehood. However, as soon as I had
power, I immediately re-established religion. I made it the ground-work
and foundation upon which I built. I considered it as the support of
sound principles and good morality, both in doctrine and in practice.
Besides, such is the restlessness of man, that his mind requires that
something undefined and marvellous which religion offers; and it is
better for him to find it there, than to seek it of Cagliostro, of
Mademoiselle Lenormand, or of the fortune-tellers and impostors.”
Somebody having ventured to say to him that he might possibly in the end
become devout, the Emperor answered, with an air of conviction, that he
feared not, and that it was with regret he said it; for it was no doubt
a great source of consolation; but that his incredulity did not proceed
from perverseness or from licentiousness of mind, but from the strength
of his reason. “Yet,” added he, “no man can answer for what will happen,
particularly in his last moments. At present I certainly believe that I
shall die without a confessor; and yet there is one (pointing to one of
us) who will perhaps receive my confession. I am assuredly very far from
being an atheist, but I cannot believe all that I am taught in spite of
my reason, without being false and a hypocrite. When I became Emperor,
and particularly after my marriage with Maria Louisa, every effort was
made to induce me to go with great pomp, according to the custom of the
Kings of France, to take the sacrament at the church of Notre Dame; but
this I positively refused to do: I did not believe in the act
sufficiently to derive any benefit from it, and yet I believed too much
in it to run the risk of committing a profanation.” On this occasion a
certain person was alluded to, who had boasted, as it were, that he had
never taken the sacrament. “That is very wrong,” said the Emperor;
“either he has not fulfilled the intention of his education, or his
education was neglected.” Then, resuming the subject, he said, “To
explain where I come from, what I am, and whither I go, is above my
comprehension; and yet all that is. I am like the watch that exists,
without possessing the consciousness of existence. However, the
sentiment of religion is so consolatory that it must be considered as a
gift of Heaven: what a resource would it not be for us here to possess
it! What influence could men and events exercise over me, if, bearing my
misfortunes as if inflicted by God, I expected to be compensated by him
with happiness hereafter! What rewards have _I_ not a right to expect
who have run a career so extraordinary, so tempestuous, without
committing a single crime, and yet how many might I not have been guilty
of? I can appear before the tribunal of God, I can await his judgment
without fear. He will not find my conscience stained with the thoughts
of murder and poisonings, with the infliction of violent and
premeditated death, events so common in the history of those whose lives
have resembled mine. I have striven only for the glory, the power, the
greatness of France. All my faculties, all my efforts, all my moments,
were directed to the attainment of that object. These cannot be crimes;
to me they appeared acts of virtue. What then would be my happiness, if
the bright prospect of futurity presented itself to crown the last
moments of my existence!”

After a pause, he resumed. "How is it possible that conviction can find
its way to our hearts, when we hear the absurd language, and witness the
acts of iniquity, of the greatest number of those whose business it is
to preach to us? I am surrounded by priests, who repeat incessantly that
their reign is not of this world, and yet they lay hands upon every
thing that they can get. The Pope is the head of that religion from
heaven, and he thinks only of this world. What did the present Chief
Pontiff, who is undoubtedly a good, and a holy man, not offer to be
allowed to return to Rome! The surrender of the government of the
church, of the institution of bishops, was not too high a price for him
to give, to become once more a secular prince. Even now, he is the
friend of all the Protestants, who grant him every thing, because they
do not fear him. He is only the enemy of catholic Austria, because her
territory surrounds his own.

“Nevertheless,” he observed again, “it cannot be doubted that, as
Emperor, the species of incredulity which I felt was favourable to the
nations I had to govern. How could I have favoured equally sects so
opposed to one another, if I had been under the influence of any one of
them? How could I have preserved the independence of my thoughts, and of
my actions, under the controul of a confessor, who would have governed
me by the dread of hell? What power cannot a wicked man, the most stupid
of mankind, thus exercise over those by whom whole nations are governed?
Is it not the scene-shifter at the opera, who from behind the scenes,
moves Hercules at his will? Who can doubt that the last years of Louis
XIV. would have been very different, had he been directed by another
confessor? I was so deeply impressed with the truth of these opinions
that I promised to do all in my power to bring up my son in the same
religious persuasion which I myself entertain.”

The Emperor ended the conversation by desiring my son to bring him the
New Testament; and, taking it from the beginning, he read as far as the
conclusion of the discourse of Jesus on the mount. He expressed himself
struck with the highest admiration, of the purity, the sublimity, the
beauty of the morality which it contained; and we all experienced the
same feeling.

               PORTRAIT OF THE DIRECTORS.—ANECDOTES.—18TH
                               FRUCTIDOR.

Sunday, 9th.—The Emperor spoke much of the creation of the Directory; he
had installed it, being then Commander-in-chief of the Army of the
Interior. This led him to review the five Directors, whose portraits and
characters he drew. He gave a lively picture of their follies and their
faults, and this led him to the events of Fructidor, and furnished many
curious particulars. I have collected the following, partly, from some
of his desultory conversations, and, partly, from his dictation of the
campaigns of Italy.

“Barras,” said the Emperor, "of a good family in Provence, was an
officer in the regiment of the Isle of France; at the revolution, he was
chosen Deputy to the National Convention for the department of the Var.
He had no talent for oratory, and no habits of business. After the 31st
of May, he was, together with Freron, appointed Commissioner to the army
of Italy, and to Provence, which was then the seat of civil war. On his
return to Paris, he threw himself into the Thermidorian party;
threatened by Robespierre, as well as Tallien and the remainder of
Danton’s party, they united, and brought about the events of the 9th
Thermidor. At the moment of the crisis, the Convention named him to
march against the _commune_, which had risen in favour of Robespierre;
he succeeded.

"This event gave him great celebrity. After the downfall of Robespierre,
all the Thermidorians became the leading men of France.

"At the critical period of the 12th Vendemiaire, it was determined, in
order to get rid at once of the three Commissioners to the Army of the
Interior, to unite in the person of Barras the power of Commissioner and
Commander of that army. But the circumstances in which he was placed
were too much for him; they were above his powers. Barras had no
experience in war, he had quitted the service when only a captain; he
had no knowledge of military affairs.

"The events of Thermidor and of Vendemiaire brought him into the
Directory; he did not possess the qualifications requisite to fill that
situation, but he acted better than was expected from him by those who
knew him.

"He kept up a splendid establishment, had a pack of hounds, and his
expenses were considerable. When he quitted the Directory, on the 18th
Brumaire, he had still a large fortune, and he did not attempt to
conceal it. That fortune was not large enough to have contributed in the
least to the derangement of the finances, but the manner in which it had
been acquired, by favouring the contractors, impaired the public morals.

"Barras was tall; he spoke sometimes in moments of agitation, and his
voice filled the house. His intellectual capacity did not allow him to
go beyond a few sentences, but the animation with which he spoke would
have produced the impression that he was a man of resolution; this
however he was not; and he had no opinion of his own upon any part of
the administration of public affairs.

"In Fructidor, he formed with Rewbel and La Reveillere Lepaux, the
majority against Carnot and Barthelemy; after that event he became to
all appearance the most important member of the Directory, but, in
reality, it was Rewbel who possessed the greatest influence. Barras
always appeared in public the warm friend of Napoleon. At the time of
the 30th Prairial, he had the art to conciliate the preponderating party
in the assembly, and he did not share the disgrace of his colleagues.

“La Reveillere Lepaux, born at Angers, belonged to the lower ranks of
the middling class of society. He was short, and his person was as
unprepossessing as can well be imagined; he was a true Æsop. He wrote
tolerably well, but his mind was narrow, and he had neither habits of
business nor knowledge of mankind. He was alternately governed,
according to circumstances, by Carnot or Rewbel. The _Jardin des
Plantes_, and the Theophilanthropy, a new religion of which he had the
folly to become the founder, occupied all his time. In other respects,
he was a patriot, warm and sincere, an honest man, and a citizen full of
probity and of learning; he was poor when he became a member of the
Directory, and poor when he left it. Nature had not qualified him to
occupy any higher station than that of an inferior magistrate.”

Napoleon, after his return from the army of Italy, found himself,
without knowing why, the object of the particular assiduity, the marked
attentions and flatteries of the Director La Reveillere, who asked him
one day to dine with him, strictly _en famille_, in order, he said, that
they might be more at liberty to converse together. The young General
accepted the invitation, and found, as he had promised, nobody present
but the Director, his wife, and his daughter, “who, by the way,” added
the Emperor, “were three paragons of ugliness.” After the dessert, the
two ladies retired, and the conversation took a serious turn. La
Reveillere descanted at length upon the disadvantages of our religion,
upon the necessity, however, of having one, and extolled and enumerated
the advantages of the religion which he wanted to establish, the
Theophilanthropy. “I was beginning to find the conversation rather
tedious and dull,” said the Emperor, “when, on a sudden, La Reveillere,
rubbing his hands with an air of satisfaction, said to me affectedly,
and with an arch look: ‘How valuable the acquisition of a man like you
would be to us!—what advantage, what weight would be derived from your
name!—and how glorious that circumstance would be to you!—Now what do
you think of it?’”—The young General was far from expecting to receive
such a proposal; however, he replied with humility, that he did not
think himself worthy of such an honour; and his principles being, when
treading an obscure path, to follow the track of those who had preceded
him in it, he was resolved to act, in the article of religion, as his
father and mother had done. This positive answer convinced the
high-priest that nothing was to be done; he did not insist, but from
that moment there was an end of all his attentions and flatteries
towards the young General.

“Rewbel,” said the Emperor, "born in Alsace, was one of the best lawyers
in the town of Colmar. He possessed that kind of intelligence which
denotes a man skilled in the practice of the bar,—his influence was
always felt in deliberations,—he was easily inspired with prejudices—did
not believe much in the existence of virtue—and his patriotism was
tinged with a degree of enthusiasm. It is problematical whether he did
or did not amass a fortune, during the time he was in the Directory; he
was surrounded by contractors, it is true,—but, with his turn of mind,
it is possible that he only amused himself by conversing with men of
activity and enterprise, and that he enjoyed their flatteries, without
making them pay for the complaisance which he shewed them. He bore a
particular hatred to the Germanic system—he displayed great energy in
the assemblies, both before and after the period of his being a
magistrate, and was fond of a life of application and activity. He had
been a member of the Constituent Assembly, and of the Convention; by the
latter he was appointed Commissioner at Mentz, where he gave no proofs
of firmness or of military talent; he contributed to the surrender of
the city, which might have held out longer. Like all lawyers, he had
imbibed from his profession a prejudice against the army.

"Carnot, born in Burgundy, had entered when very young the corps of
engineers, and shewed himself an advocate of the system of Montalembert.
He was considered by his companions as an eccentric character, and was
already a knight of the order of St. Louis at the commencement of the
revolution, the principles of which he warmly espoused. He became a
member of the Convention, and was one of the committee of public welfare
with Robespierre, Barrère, Couthon, Saint-Juste, Billaud-Varennes,
Collot-d’Herbois, &c. He was particularly inveterate against the
nobility, and found himself, in consequence, frequently engaged in
quarrels with Robespierre, who, towards the close of his life, had taken
a great many nobles under his protection.

"Carnot was laborious, sincere on every occasion, but unaccustomed to
intrigue and easily deceived. He was attached to Jourdan, as
Commissioner from the Convention, at the time when Jourdan was employed
in relieving the town of Mentz, which was besieged; and he rendered some
services on the occasion. In the Committee of Public Welfare, he
directed the operations of the war, and was found useful, but he had
neither experience nor practice in the military matters. He displayed on
every occasion great moral courage.

"After the events of Thermidor, when the Convention caused all the
members of the committee of Public Welfare to be arrested, with the
exception of himself, Carnot insisted upon sharing their fate. This
conduct was the more noble, inasmuch as public opinion had pronounced
itself violently against the Committee. He was nominated a member of the
Directory after Vendemiaire; but after the 9th Thermidor his mind was
deeply affected by the reproaches of public opinion, which attributed to
the committee all the blood which had flowed on the scaffold. He felt
the necessity of gaining esteem, and, believing that he took the lead,
he suffered himself to be led by some of those who directed the party
from abroad. His merit was then extolled to the skies, but he did not
deserve the praises of the enemies of France; he found himself placed in
a critical situation, and fell in Fructidor.

"After the 18th Brumaire, Carnot was recalled by the First Consul and
placed in the department of war; he had several quarrels with the
Minister of the Finances and Dufrenes the Director of the Treasury, in
which it is but fair to say that he was always in the wrong. At last, he
left the department, persuaded that it could no longer go on for want of
money.

"When a member of the Tribunate, he spoke and voted against the
establishment of the Empire; but his conduct, open and manly, gave no
uneasiness to the administration. At a later period, he was appointed
Chief Inspector of Reviews, and received from the Emperor, on his
retiring from the service, a pension of twenty thousand francs. As long
as things went on prosperously, the Emperor heard nothing of him: but,
after the campaign of Russia, at the time of the disasters of France,
Carnot solicited to be employed: he was appointed to command the town of
Antwerp, and he behaved well at his post. On his return in 1815, the
Emperor, after a little hesitation, appointed him to be Minister of the
Interior, and had no cause to repent of having done so; he found him
faithful, laborious, full of probity, and always sincere. In the month
of June, Carnot was named one of the Commission of the Provisional
Government, but being unfit for the place, he was duped.

“Le Tourneur de la Manche was born in Normandy; he had been an officer
of engineers before the revolution. It is difficult to explain how he
came to be appointed to the Directory; it can only be from one of those
unaccountable caprices of which large assemblies so often furnish
examples. He was a man of narrow capacity, little learning, and of a
weak mind. There were in the Convention five hundred deputies better
qualified for the situation; he was however a man of strict probity, and
left the Directory without any fortune.”

Le Tourneur made himself the talk and the laughing-stock of Paris; it
was said that he came from his department to take possession at the
Directory in a cart, with his house-keeper, his kitchen utensils, and
his poultry. The wags of the capital marked him, and he was overwhelmed
with ridicule. He was made, for instance, to return from the _Jardin des
Plantes_, whither he had run immediately on his arrival in Paris, and to
give an account of the rare things he had found there; and, on being
asked whether he had seen Lacepede,[19] he was surprised that he should
have passed it unobserved, declaring that _la Giraffe_ (the camelopard)
was the only thing that had been pointed out to him.[20]

Footnote 19:

  Professor of Natural History.

Footnote 20:

  I have been since told that part of these jokes had nothing to do with
  Le Tourneur, but related to a man of the name of Letourneux, who was a
  Minister about that time.

"The Directory was hardly established before it began to lower itself in
public estimation by caprices, bad morals, and false measures. The
faults and absurdities which it committed daily completed its discredit,
and it was lost in reputation almost at the very moment of its
formation. Intoxicated with their elevation, the Directors thought it
became them to adopt a certain air, and sought to acquire the appearance
and manners of _bon ton_. In order the better to succeed, they formed
each a little Court, where they received and welcomed the higher
classes, hitherto in disgrace, and who were naturally their enemies, and
from which they excluded the greatest part of their old acquaintances
and former companions, as thenceforward too vulgar. All those who during
the Revolution had shown more energy than the members of the Directory,
or who had trodden in the same path with them, became odious to them and
were immediately kept aloof; and the Directory thus rendered itself
ridiculous to one party, and alienated the affections of the other.
These five little Courts exacted a greater degree of servility in
proportion as they were inferior and ridiculous; but numbers of men were
found who could not bring themselves to bend and submit to formalities
which the recollection of recent circumstances, the nature of the
government and the character of the governors, rendered inadmissible.

"However, all the Directory could do to gain over the saloons of Paris
proved of no avail: it did not succeed in acquiring any influence over
them, and the Bourbon party was gaining ground. No sooner did the
Directors perceive this than they hastily retraced their steps; but it
was too late to recover the good-will of the republicans, whom they had
estranged by their conduct. This led to a system of wavering, which
looked like caprice; no course was laid down to steer by, no object was
kept in view, no unity prevailed. The reigns of terror and of royalty
were equally objected to; but in the mean time the road which was to
lead to the goal was left untried. The Directory thought to put an end
to this state of uncertainty and to avoid these perpetual waverings, by
striking at one blow the two extreme parties, whether they had deserved
it or not: if therefore a royalist, who had conspired or disturbed the
public tranquillity, was arrested by their orders, they caused a
republican, innocent or guilty, to be arrested at the same moment. This
system was nicknamed _The Political Seesaw_, but the injustice and fraud
which characterized it entirely discredited the government; every heart
was closed; it was a government of lead. Every true and generous feeling
was against the Directory.

"Men of business, jobbers and intriguers, by possessing themselves of
the springs of government, acquired the greatest influence; all places
were given to worthless individuals, to _protégés_, or to
relations—corruption crept into every branch of the administration. This
was soon perceived, and those who had it in their power to waste the
public money could act without fear; the foreign relations, the armies,
the finances, the department of the Interior, all felt the pernicious
effects of so vicious a system. This state of things soon gathered a
storm on the political horizon, and we proceeded with rapid strides to
the crisis of Fructidor.

"At that period the measures of the Directory were weak, capricious, and
uncertain; emigrants returned to France, and newspapers, paid by
foreigners, dared openly to stigmatize the most deserving of our
patriots. The fury of the enemies of our national glory exasperated the
soldiers of the army of Italy, which declared itself loudly against
them; whilst the Councils, in their turn, acting the parts of real
counter-revolutionists, spoke of nothing but priests, bells, and
emigrants. All the officers of the army, who had distinguished
themselves more or less in the departments, in the battalions of
volunteers, or even in the regiments of the line, finding themselves
thus attacked in their dearest interests, inflamed more and more the
anger of their soldiers; the minds of all parties were in a state of
effervescence. In a moment of such violent agitation, what measures
could the General of the army of Italy adopt? He had the choice of
three:

“1st. To side with the preponderating party in the Councils—but it was
too late; the army had declared itself, and the leaders of that party,
the orators of the Council, by attacking incessantly both the General
and his army, had not left him the possibility of adopting that
resolution.

2dly. “To embrace the party of the Directory and of the Republic. That
was the plainest course, that which duty pointed out, which the army
inclined to, and in which he was already engaged; for all the writers
who had remained faithful to the cause of the Revolution had declared
themselves, of their own accord, the ardent defenders and warm advocates
of the army and its commanders.

3dly. “To overpower both factions, by stepping forward boldly and
appearing openly in the contest as regulator of the Republic. But
notwithstanding the strength which Napoleon felt that he derived from
the support of the army, although his character was highly esteemed in
France, he did not think that the spirit of the times and public opinion
were such as to allow him to take so daring a step. And besides, if this
third measure had been that to which he secretly inclined, he could not
have adopted it immediately, and without having previously sided with
one of the two parties, which appeared at that moment in the political
lists. It was absolutely necessary, even in order to form a third party,
to side first either with the Councils or with the Directory.

“Thus, of the three measures to be adopted, the third in its execution
merged into the two first, and he was entirely debarred from adopting
the first of these two by the new formation of the Councils, and by the
attacks already made upon him by them.

“These considerations and conclusions,” the Emperor observed, “were the
natural result of a deep meditation upon the then existing state of
affairs in France. The General had therefore nothing to do but to let
events take their course, and second the impulse of his troops. And this
view of the subject produced the proclamation to the army of Italy, and
the far-famed order of the day of its General.

“‘Soldiers!’ he said, ‘I know that your hearts are full of grief at the
calamities of our country; but, if it were possible that foreign armies
should triumph, we would fly from the summit of the Alps with the
rapidity of the eagle, to defend once more that cause which has already
cost us so much blood.’

“These words decided the question; the soldiers, in ecstasy, were for
marching at once upon Paris. The rumour of the event spread immediately
to the capital, and produced a most powerful sensation. The Directory,
which every body considered as lost, which the moment before was
tottering alone and abandoned, found itself at once supported by public
opinion; it immediately assumed the attitude, and followed the course of
a triumphant party, and defeated all its enemies.

“The General of the army of Italy had sent the proclamation to his
soldiers to the Directory by Augereau, because he was a Parisian and
strongly in favour of the prevailing notions of the day.

“Nevertheless, the politicians of the day made the following surmises:
What would Napoleon have done if the Councils had triumphed; if that
faction, instead of being overthrown, had, on the contrary, overthrown
the Directory? In that case, it appears, that he was determined to march
upon Lyons and Mirbel with fifteen thousand men, where he would have
been joined by all the republicans from the south and from Burgundy. The
victorious Council would not have been more than three or four days
without coming to some violent rupture and division: for it is known
that, if the numbers of these Councils were unanimous in their
proceedings against the Directory, they were far from being so as to the
further course they meant to pursue. The leaders, such as Pichegru,
Imbert-Colonnes, and others, sold to foreign powers, exerted all their
influence to restore royalty and bring about a counter-revolution;
whilst Carnot and others sought to produce results quite opposite to
these. France would therefore have become immediately a prey to
confusion and anarchy, and in that case, all factions would have seen,
with satisfaction, Napoleon appear as a rallying point, an anchor of
safety, capable of saving them at the same time from the terror of
royalty and from the terror of demagogues. Napoleon would then naturally
have repaired to Paris, and found himself placed at the head of affairs
by the unanimous wish and consent of all parties. The majority of the
Councils was strong and positive, it is true, but it was only against
the Directors; it would have been divided _ad infinitum_ as soon as they
were overturned.

“The choice of three new Directors having openly exposed the true
intention of the measures of the counter-revolution, the greatest number
of the citizens, in their alarm, were ready to fly to meet Napoleon with
the national oriflamme[21] unfurled; for the true counter-revolutionists
were after all few in number, and their pretensions were too ridiculous
and absurd. Every thing would have given way before Napoleon. Had they
called him Cæsar or Cromwell, still he would have marched with a
religion, a party, whose ideas were settled and popular; he was master
of his soldiers, the coffers of the army were full, and he was in
possession of every other means calculated to ensure their constancy and
their fidelity. If the question were now to be asked whether Napoleon,
in the recesses of his own mind, would or would not have wished affairs
to take this turn, we should give our opinion in the affirmative; and we
are led to believe from the following fact, that his wishes and his
hopes were in favour of the triumph of the majority of the Councils. At
the moment of the crisis between the two factions, a secret decree,
signed by the three members composing the party of the Directory, asked
him for three millions to resist the attack of the Councils, but
Napoleon, under various pretences, did not send them, although it would
have been easy for him to do so; yet it is well known that it is not
consistent with his character to hesitate in money matters.

Footnote 21:

  The _oriflamme_ was a flag which was carried before the kings of
  France.

“Therefore, when the struggle was over, and the Directory took pleasure
in acknowledging openly that it owed its existence to Napoleon, it still
entertained some vague suspicions that Napoleon had only espoused its
cause in the hopes of seeing it overthrown, and of taking its place.

“Be that as it may, after the 18th Fructidor, the enthusiasm of the army
was at its height, and the triumph of Napoleon complete. But the
Directory, notwithstanding its apparent gratitude, surrounded Napoleon
from that moment with numerous agents, who watched his motions and
endeavoured to penetrate his thoughts.

"The situation of Napoleon was one of extreme delicacy, although his
conduct was so well regulated, and so admirable, that even at this
period we can only form mere conjectures on the subject; but to the
delicacy of his situation it is that we think we can trace the principal
reasons which led to the conclusion of the peace at Campo Formio, to his
refusal to remain at the Congress of Rastadt, and finally, to the
undertaking of the expedition to Egypt.

“As it always happens in France, immediately after the 18th Fructidor,
the party that had been overthrown disappeared on a sudden, and the
majority of the Directory triumphed without moderation. It became every
thing, and reduced the Councils to nothing.

“Napoleon then felt the necessity of peace, which, putting an end to the
present state of affairs, would increase his popularity: he had every
thing to fear from the prolongation of war; it might furnish those who
should have suspected him ready pretexts for injuring him; or the
intention might be to expose him in situations of difficulty, and unite
the other generals against him.

“Two of the generals, who enjoyed the greatest reputation at that time,
manifested openly their sentiments with respect to the great affair of
Fructidor: these were Moreau and Hoche.

“Moreau had declared himself positively against the Directory, and by a
line of conduct at once pusillanimous and culpable, he failed in his
duty and compromised his honour.

“Hoche was entirely in favour of the Directory, impelled by the
impetuosity of his disposition, he marched part of his army upon Paris,
and failed by acting with too much precipitation. His troops were
countermanded by the influence of the Councils, and he himself was
obliged to leave Paris, to avoid being arrested by order of these
Councils. Hoche had therefore done nothing to contribute to the success
of the 18th Fructidor; on the contrary he had injured the cause by
excess of zeal. But he had shown himself a man entirely devoted to the
Directory, and the majority of them could rely on him without reserve,
although his imprudence had nearly been the cause of their ruin.

“That same majority of the Directory entertained doubts, on the
contrary, with respect to Napoleon, who had been the cause of their
triumph; they still thought it possible that the General of the army of
Italy had calculated that the Directory would fall in the contest with
the Councils, and that he might then rise upon its ruins.

“But how could the Directory reconcile that supposition with the acts of
the General, who had done every thing to ensure its triumph? for it is
evident that without the order of the day of Napoleon, and the address
to his army, the Directory would have been undone.

“Some persons, well informed on the subject, seem to think that Napoleon
had really not formed a due estimate of the influence which he exercised
in France—that he had suffered himself to be misled by the libels and
the newspapers in which he was attacked,—and that he had considered the
measures which he adopted calculated not to ensure the complete triumph
of the Directory, but to produce precisely the effect of rendering him
the deliverer and the true support of the republic. The same persons add
that when the officers whom Napoleon had at Paris, and letters from
every part of France, had informed him that his proclamation had in one
moment changed altogether the state of public feeling in the interior,
then, and then only, he saw that he had done too much. We are the more
ready to adopt this opinion as we cannot understand why Napoleon should
have thought of preserving three Directors whom he did not care about.
The only one he esteemed (Carnot) was of the opposite party, and we know
that he felt indignant at the corruptness and the weakness of the
others.

“A man named Bottot, a private agent of Barras, was sent to Napoleon
with secret instructions, to endeavour to penetrate his views and to
ascertain why he had not sent the three millions of which the Directory
had stood so much in need. Bottot found the French General at
Passeriano, and began to intrigue right and left with those who
surrounded Napoleon; but he found every one warmly attached to the party
that had triumphed; and, having some concerns of his own to arrange, he
at last, in the course of some private conversations, confessed the
secret of his mission and the vague suspicions entertained by the
Directory. He had been soon undeceived by the appearance of simplicity
which distinguished Napoleon’s establishment, by the frankness of
Napoleon himself; and above all by the enthusiasm of the army, and of
the whole of Italy in favour of the General. But, even if the suspicion
of the Directory had been well founded, it would not have been
difficult, with a few marks of attention, and some frank and unaffected
conversations, to remove from Bottot’s mind, surrounded as he then was,
all cause of umbrage.

“He wrote to Paris that the fears which had been entertained were
altogether groundless, and much less to be dreaded than the perverseness
of those who wished to excite them. But the three millions, it was
objected to him, why were they refused? Napoleon had proved that the
order sent by the Directory was mysterious and irregular, and that,
encompassed as it was by such rogues as F—— and others, who had already
robbed the public exchequer, he had thought it prudent to ascertain the
truth; that he had immediately dispatched Lavalette, his confidential
aid-de-camp, to Paris, and that, as soon as Lavalette had informed him
of the true state of affairs, he was on the point of sending off the
three millions, when the fate of the day was decided.”

                        ENGLISH DIPLOMACY.—LORD
         WHITWORTH.—CHATHAM.—CASTLEREAGH.—CORNWALLIS.—FOX, &C.

Monday, 10th—The course of our conversation to-day led the Emperor to
observe that nothing was so dangerous and so treacherous as official
conversations with diplomatic agents of Great Britain. “The English
Ministers,” said he, “never represent an affair from their nation to
another, but as from themselves to their own nation. They care little
what their adversaries have said or say; they boldly put forward what
their diplomatic agents have said, or what they make them say, on the
ground that, those agents having a public and acknowledged character,
faith must be placed in their reports. It is in pursuance of this
principle, Napoleon added, that the English Ministers published at the
time, under the name of Lord Whitworth, a long conversation between me
and Whitworth, the account of which was entirely false.”[22]

Footnote 22:

  We who have been at St. Helena, we who have seen and been concerned in
  the facts alleged by Lord Bathurst, before the parliament of Great
  Britain, we all can affirm, before God and man, that the British
  Ministers have on that occasion fully deserved the just reproaches
  which they incurred at the time of Lord Whitworth. Many Englishmen,
  who were then at St. Helena, have acknowledged it to us, and have
  confessed that they blushed for their country!!

That ambassador had solicited an audience of the First Consul, and
personal communications. The First Consul, who was himself fond of
treating affairs directly, willingly assented. “But this proved for me,”
said the Emperor, “a lesson which altered my method for ever. From this
moment, I never treated officially of political affairs, but through the
intervention of my minister for Foreign affairs. He at any rate could
give a positive and formal denial; which the sovereign could not do.

“It is utterly false,” added the Emperor, "that any thing occurred in
the course of our personal interview, which was not in conformity with
the common rules of decorum. Lord Whitworth himself, after our
conference, being in company with other Ambassadors, expressed himself
perfectly satisfied, and added that he had no doubt all things would be
satisfactorily settled. But what was the surprise of those same
Ambassadors, when they read a short time afterwards in the English
newspapers the report of Lord Whitworth, in which he charged me with
having behaved in the interview with unbecoming violence! We had some
warm friends amongst these Ambassadors, and some of them went so far as
to express their surprise to the English diplomatist, observing to him
that his report was very different from what he had said to them
immediately after the conference. Lord Whitworth made the best excuse he
could, but persisted in maintaining the assertions of the official
document.

“The fact is,” said the Emperor, “that every political agent of Great
Britain is in the habit of making two reports on the same subject; one
public and false for the ministerial archives, the other confidential
and true for the Ministers themselves, and for them alone; and when the
responsibility of Ministers is at stake, they produce the first of these
documents, which, although false, answers every purpose, and serves to
exonerate them. And thus it is,” added the Emperor, "that the best
institutions become vicious, when they are no longer founded on
morality, and when their agents are only actuated by selfishness, pride,
and insolence. Absolute power has no need of disguise; it is silent:
responsible governments, being obliged to speak, have recourse to
artifice, and lie with effrontery.

"It is, however, a circumstance worthy of remark, that, in my great
struggle with England, the government of that country has constantly
contrived to attach so much odium to my person and actions; and that
they have so impudently exclaimed against my despotism, my selfishness,
my ambition, and my perfidy, when they alone were guilty of all they
dared to lay to my charge. A very strong prejudice must have existed
against me, I must have been indeed very much to be feared, since people
could suffer themselves to be thus deceived. I can understand it from
Kings and Cabinets, their existence was at stake; but from the
people!!...

"The British Ministers spoke incessantly of my duplicity; but could any
thing be compared to their Machiavelism, their selfishness, during the
existence of disorders and convulsions, which were kept alive by them?

"They sacrificed unfortunate Austria in 1805, merely to escape the
invasion with which I threatened them.

"They sacrificed her again in 1809, to be more at liberty to act in the
Peninsula.

"They sacrificed Prussia in 1806, in the hopes of recovering Hanover.

"They did not assist Russia in 1807, because they chose rather to seize
distant colonies, and because they were attempting to take possession of
Egypt.

"They gave to the world the infamous spectacle of bombarding Copenhagen
in time of peace, and lying in ambush to steal the Danish fleet. They
had already once before exhibited a similar spectacle by seizing, like
highway robbers, also in time of peace, four Spanish frigates laden with
rich treasures.

"Lastly, during the war in the Peninsula, where they endeavoured to
prolong the existence of anarchy and confusion, their principal object
was to traffic with the wants and the blood of the Spanish nation, by
obliging it to purchase their services and their supplies at the expense
of gold and concessions.

"Whilst all Europe, through their intrigues and their subsidies, was
bathed in blood, they were only intent upon providing for their own
safety, gaining advantages for their trade, and obtaining the
sovereignty of the sea and the monopoly of the world. As for myself, I
had never done any thing of the kind, and, until the unfortunate
business with Spain, which after all is not to be compared with the
affair of Copenhagen, I can say that my morality was unimpeachable. My
actions had perhaps been dictatorial and peremptory, but never disgraced
by perfidy. Who can be surprised, after all this, if, in 1814, although
England had really been the deliverer of Europe, not a single Englishman
could show himself on the Continent without meeting at every step with
maledictions, hatred, and execrations? Who can ask how this happened?
Every tree bears its own fruit; we reap only what we have sown; and such
was necessarily the infallible result of the misdeeds of the English
Government, the tyranny and the insolence of the Ministers in London,
and of their agents all over the globe.

"For the last fifty years the administrations of Great Britain have
gradually declined in consideration and in public estimation. Formerly,
the struggle for power was between great national parties, characterised
by grand and distinct systems; but now we see only the bickerings of one
and the same oligarchy, having constantly the same object in view, and
whose discordant members adjust their differences by compromise and
concessions: they have turned the Cabinet of St. James’s into a shop.

"The policy of Lord Chatham was marked by acts of injustice, no doubt;
but at least he proclaimed them with boldness and energy; they had a
certain air of grandeur. Pitt introduced into the Cabinet a system of
hypocrisy and dissimulation. Lord Castlereagh, the self-styled heir of
Pitt, has brought into it the extreme of every kind of turpitude and
immorality. Chatham gloried in being a merchant; Lord Castlereagh, to
the serious injury of his nation, has indulged himself in the
satisfaction of acting the _fine gentleman_; he has sacrificed his
country to fraternise with the great people of the continent, and from
that moment has united in his person the vices of the saloon with the
cupidity of the counting-house; the duplicity and obsequiousness of the
courtier with the haughtiness and insolence of the upstart. The poor
English constitution is in imminent danger. What a difference between
such men and the Foxes, the Sheridans, and the Greys, those splendid
talents, those noble characters of the Opposition, who have been the
objects of the ridicule of a victorious oligarchy!

“Lord Cornwallis,” said the Emperor, "is the first Englishman who gave
me, in good earnest, a favourable opinion of his nation; after him Fox,
and I might add to these, if it were necessary, our present Admiral
(Malcolm).

"Cornwallis was, in every sense of the word, a worthy, good, and honest
man. At the time of the treaty of Amiens, the terms having been agreed
upon, he had promised to sign the next day at a certain hour; something
of consequence detained him at home, but he pledged his word. The
evening of that same day, a courier arrived from London proscribing
certain articles of the treaty, but he answered that he had signed, and
immediately came and actually signed. We understood each other perfectly
well; I had placed a regiment at his disposal, and he took pleasure in
seeing its manœuvres. I have preserved an agreeable recollection of
him in every respect, and it is certain that a request from him would
have had more weight with me, perhaps, than one from a crowned head. His
family appears to have guessed this to be the case; some requests have
been made to me in its name, which have all been granted.

"Fox came to France immediately after the peace of Amiens. He was
employed in writing a history of the Stuarts, and asked my permission to
search our diplomatic archives. I gave orders that every thing should be
placed at his disposal. I received him often. Fame had informed me of
his talents, and I soon found that he possessed a noble character, a
good heart, liberal, generous, and enlightened views. I considered him
an ornament to mankind, and was very much attached to him. We often
conversed together upon various topics, without the least prejudice;
when I wished to engage in a little controversy, I turned the
conversation upon the subject of the infernal machine; and told him that
his ministers had attempted to murder me; he would then oppose my
opinion with warmth, and invariably ended the conversation by saying, in
his bad French, ‘First Consul, pray take that out of your head.’ But he
was not convinced of the truth of the cause he undertook to advocate,
and there is every reason to believe that he argued more in defence of
his country, than of the morality of its ministers."

The Emperor ended the conversation, by saying: “Half a dozen such men as
Fox and Cornwallis would be sufficient to establish the moral character
of a nation.... With such men I should always have agreed; we should
soon have settled our differences, and not only France would have been
at peace with a nation at bottom most worthy of esteem, but we should
have done great things together.”

HISTORY OF THE CONVENTION BY LACRETELLE.—STATISTICAL NOTICE OF THE OXEN
  OF THE ISLAND.—PUNS.—STATISTICS IN GENERAL.

Tuesday, 11th.—This has been one of those days of wind and rain so
common here. The Emperor, about three o’clock, took advantage of a short
interval to visit the garden. He sent for me; he had just been reading
the history of the Convention by Lacretelle. It is, he observed,
certainly not ill-written; but it is ill-digested, and makes no
impression on the memory; the whole is a smooth surface without a single
asperity to arrest attention. He does not thoroughly examine his
subject: he has not done justice to many celebrated characters; he gives
no adequate colouring to the crimes of several others, &c.

The rain obliged us to return, and we walked alone for a long time in
the saloon and the dining room.

We had been informed, that there were four thousand oxen in the island,
and that the annual consumption consisted of five hundred, of which
number one hundred and fifty were appropriated to us, fifty to the
colony, and three hundred to the shipping. It was added, that four years
were requisite for the reproduction of the stock, and this formed a
subject for our calculations; an employment for which the Emperor’s
peculiar taste is well known.

The subsistence and consumption of these oxen are an important affair in
the island. A single beast cannot be killed without the previous order
of the governor, and it was stated by one of our people, that the owner
of one of the houses or huts of the island, speaking to him on the
subject, said: “It is reported, that you complain up yonder, and
consider yourselves badly off; (he spoke of Longwood) but we are at a
loss to make it out; for it is said that you have beef every day, while
we cannot get it but three or four times a year, and even then we pay
for it at the rate of fifteen or twenty pence a pound.” The Emperor, who
laughed heartily at the story, observed, “You ought to have assured him,
that it cost us more than a crown.”

I observed some time afterwards, that it was the only pun I had till
then heard from the Emperor’s mouth, but the person to whom I made the
remark, said he had heard of his having made a similar one, and on the
same subject, in the isle of Elba. A mason employed in some buildings,
which were to be constructed by the Emperor’s order, had fallen and hurt
himself; the Emperor wishing to encourage him, assured him, that it
would be of no consequence. “I have had,” said he, “a much worse fall
than yours; but look at me, I am on my legs, and hearty, for all that.”

The Emperor’s attention was for a moment directed to political
statistics. He highly extolled the progress and utility of that new
science, so well adapted, he observed, to point out the path of truth,
to establish and confirm opinions. He called it the _budget of things_,
and “without budget,” said he gaily, “there is no safety.”

The singular application of the science by an Englishman or German, who
had the patience and resolution to ascertain the number of times each
letter of the alphabet occurred in the Bible, was then noticed by a
person present. He also mentioned another application of it, less dull,
but not less singular. It was that made by a German, eighty years of
age, who amused himself with calculating what he might have eaten,
during his life, in beef, mutton, poultry, vegetables, &c. as well as
what he had drunk. The estimate comprehended immense droves, flocks, and
accumulations of all sorts. The public market-place was incapable of
containing all he had devoured. This minute applicant of the science did
not stop there. He had the curiosity to inquire how often he might have
again swallowed the same things. For, he judiciously observed, their
transmutation in his person ought necessarily to have contributed to
their reproduction. The Emperor laughed much at the calculation, and
more particularly at the whimsical repetition of the same eatables.

CHARACTERS. BAILLI, LAFAYETTE, MONGES, GRÉGOIRE, &C.—ST. DOMINGO.—SYSTEM
  TO BE FOLLOWED.—DICTATIONS ON THE CONVENTION.

June 12th.—We have had three days of horrible weather, when a moment
that promised to continue fine, induced the Emperor to take an airing in
his carriage. He had just finished reading the History of the
Constituent Assembly, by Rabeau de St. Etienne. He entertained very
nearly the same opinion of this writer as of Lacretelle. He then took
occasion to notice several characters.

“Bailli,” he said, “was not a bad man, but unquestionably a miserable
politician. Lafayette was another simpleton, and by no means formed for
the eminent character he wished to represent. His political simplicity
was such, that he could not avoid being the constant dupe of men and
things. His breaking up of the chambers on my return from Waterloo, was
my ruin. Who could have persuaded him, that I had arrived merely for the
purpose of dissolving them;—I, whose only safety was centred in them?”

One of the party saying, by way of excuse or extenuation; “It was,
however, sire, the same man, who, treating afterwards with the allies,
was filled with indignation at their proposal of delivering up your
Majesty, and eagerly asked, if it was to the prisoner of Olmutz they
dared to address themselves?”—"But, sir," replied the Emperor, “you run
from one subject to another, or rather, you concur with, instead of
opposing, my opinion. I have not attacked the sentiments or intentions
of M. de Lafayette; I have only complained of their fatal results.”

The Emperor then continued, in the same way, to review the leading men
of that period. He dwelt at considerable length on the affair of Favras,
&c.

“For the rest,” observed the Emperor, "nothing was more common than to
find men of that epoch quite the reverse in character of that which
their words and actions seemed to establish. Monges, for instance, might
be considered a terrible man. When war was resolved upon, he declared
from the tribune of the Jacobins, that he would give his two daughters
in marriage to the two first soldiers who might be wounded by the enemy.
This he was at liberty to do, in the strict sense of the gift, as far as
it respected himself; but he maintained, that others should be compelled
to follow his example, and that all the nobility should be put to death,
&c. Yet Monges was one of the mildest and weakest men living, and would
not have suffered a chicken to be killed, if he had been obliged to do
it himself or to see it done. This furious republican, as he believed
himself, cherished, however, a kind of worship for me, which he pushed
to adoration. He loved me, as a man loves his mistress.

"Grégoire, whose animosity to the clergy, whom he wished to bring back
to their original simplicity, was so great that he might have passed for
a champion of irreligion, may be mentioned as another instance; yet
Grégoire, when the revolutionists were denying their God, and abolishing
the priesthood, was very near being massacred in mounting the tribune,
for the purpose of boldly declaring his religious sentiments, and
protesting that he would die a priest. At the very moment when the work
of destruction was going on in all the churches against the altars,
Grégoire erected one in his own apartment, and said mass there every
day. This man’s lot, however, is decidedly cast. If he be driven from
France, he must take refuge in St. Domingo. The friend, the advocate,
the eulogist of the negroes will be a god, or a saint, among them."

St. Domingo naturally became the next subject of our conversation. I
had, in my younger days, seen that colony in its most flourishing state.
The Emperor put many questions to me, and made himself acquainted with
all the circumstances relating to that remote period. When his enquiries
were over, he said, “I shall, no doubt, astonish you: but I am
convinced, even from your own statements, that the island has not, at
this moment, lost a third, certainly not one half of its value, and
that, in a short time, it will recover all its former prosperity.”

I should not, in reality, be surprised at it; for all the absurd
stories, circulated in Europe respecting France, ought to put us on our
guard against those which might be safely told with regard to St.
Domingo.

The Emperor said that, after the restoration, the French government had
sent out emissaries and proposals which were laughed at by the negroes.
“As to myself,” he added, “on my return from Elba, I would have settled
all differences with them; I would have recognized their independence,
contented myself with some factories, like those on the coast of Africa,
endeavoured to draw them closer to the mother country, and to establish
a kind of family intercourse with them, which might, in my opinion, have
been easily accomplished.”

“I have to reproach myself with the attempt made upon the colony during
the consulship. The design of reducing it by force was a great error. I
ought to have been satisfied with governing it through the medium of
Toussaint. Peace with England was not sufficiently consolidated, and the
territorial wealth I should have acquired by its reduction would have
served but to enrich our enemies.” He had, he observed, the greater
reason to reproach himself with this fault, because he had foreseen its
failure, and it was executed against his inclination. He had solely
yielded to the opinion of the council of state and his ministers,
hurried along, as they were by the clamours of the colonists, who formed
a considerable party at Paris, and were, besides, he said, either nearly
all royalists or in the pay of the English faction.

The Emperor assured us, that the army which had been sent out consisted
but of sixteen thousand men, and was quite sufficient. The failure of
the expedition was solely to be attributed to accidental circumstances,
such as the yellow fever, the death of the Commander-in-chief, but above
all to his blunders, a new war, &c.

“The arrival of the Captain General Leclere,” said the Emperor, "was
followed by complete success, but he had not the skill to ensure its
continuance. Had he followed the secret instructions which I drew up for
him myself, he would have saved many lives and spared himself great
mortifications. I ordered him, among other things, to associate with
himself men of colour, that he might the better keep the Blacks in
subjection; and, as soon as he had reduced the Colony, to send to France
all the black Generals and superior officers, to be placed at the
disposal of the minister at war, who would have employed them in their
respective ranks. This measure, which would have deprived the Negro
population of its chiefs and its leaders, would have been a decisive
stroke, without wounding in their persons the military laws and
regulations. But Leclere did just the contrary: he kept down the people
of colour, and bestowed his confidence on the black Generals. In
consequence, as it might naturally be expected, he was duped by the
latter, found himself beset with difficulties, and the Colony was lost.
At first, he would not send to France Toussaint, who had filled a
distinguished post there; but after some time he found himself obliged
to order his apprehension and to send him prisoner to us. Malevolence
did not fail to paint this act under the odious colours of tyranny and
perfidy, representing Toussaint as an innocent victim deserving of the
deepest interest; and yet he was eminently criminal.

"Toussaint was not a man destitute of merit; though certainly he was not
what people attempted to describe him at the time. His character,
besides, was ill calculated to inspire real confidence; he had given us
serious causes of complaint. We must always have distrusted him.[23] He
was chiefly guided by an officer of engineers or artillery, director of
the fortifications of St. Domingo. (Colonel Vincent). That officer had
come to France before Leclere’s expedition, and conferences were, for a
long time, held with him. He exerted himself very much to prevent the
attempt, and described with great precision, all its difficulties,
without pretending, however, that it was impossible." The Emperor
thought that the Bourbons might succeed in reducing St. Domingo if they
employed force; but on that subject the result of arms was not to be
calculated upon; it was rather the result of commerce and of grand
political views. Three or four hundred millions of capital transferred
from France to a remote country; an indefinite period for reaping the
fruits of such a sacrifice; the very great certainty of seeing them
engrossed by the English, or swallowed up by revolutions, &c.: those
were the points for consideration. The Emperor concluded with saying,
"The colonial system, which we have witnessed, is closed for us, as well
as for the whole continent of Europe; we must give it up, and henceforth
confine ourselves to the free navigation of the seas, and the complete
liberty of universal exchange.”

Footnote 23:

  The “Memoires de Napoleon” (published at Paris by Bossange, in 1823)
  contain notes by the Emperor on a history of St. Domingo, which
  furnish precise and curious particulars respecting the expedition
  against that colony, the causes which led to the undertaking, to its
  failure, &c.

The History of the Convention, of which Napoleon had already expressed
his disapprobation, again presented itself to his thoughts; he was far
from being satisfied with Lacretelle. “Sentences in abundance,” he
repeated, “and but little colouring, no depth: he is an academician, but
in no respect a historian.” He made me call my son, and dictated the two
following notes, of which I give a literal copy, however imperfect they
may be, for he never read them a second time. Every thing that comes
from him is, in my opinion, valuable.

                                NOTE I.

"The Convention, called by a law of the Legislative Assembly to give a
new constitution to France, decreed the Republic; not that the most
enlightened did not think the republican system incompatible with the
existing state of manners in France, but because the Monarchy could not
be continued without placing the Duke of Orleans on the throne, which
would have alienated a great part of the nation.

"An executive power, consisting of five ministers, was established by
the Convention for conducting the affairs of the republic.

"Two parties contended for the ascendancy in the National Convention:
that of the _Girondists_, composed of men who had influenced the
Legislative Assembly, and that of the _Mountain_, formed by the Commune
of Paris, which had directed the atrocities of the 10th of August and
the 2d of September, and commanded the population of the capital.

"Vergniaud, Brissot, Condorcet, Guadet, and Roland, were the leaders of
the Girondists; Danton, Robespierre, Marat, Collot d’Herbois, and
Billaud-Varennes, headed the Mountain. These two parties were alike
indebted for their rise to the principles of the revolution. Their
conductors sprang out of the popular societies which they had
successively rendered subservient to their views.

"The party of the Girondists was more powerful in talents, and was
eminently popular in the great provincial towns, particularly at
Bourdeaux, Montpellier, Marseilles, Caen, Lyons, &:c.

"The party of the Mountain possessed more energy and enthusiasm, and was
not less popular in the capital and among the clubs of the departments.

"The Girondist party, which, in the Legislative Assembly, had been the
most ardent for the Revolution, became, in the Convention, the most
moderate; because it had to contend there with a faction much more
violent than itself, which had not found its way into the Assembly.

"The Girondists called their adversaries the faction of September, and
constantly reproached them with the horrible massacre of which they were
guilty. They accused them of being hostile to a national assembly, and
of endeavouring to transfer the government of France to the Commune of
Paris; but by these means the Girondists only excited against themselves
the Jacobins of all the departments.

"On its side, the Commune of Paris (the Mountaineers) stigmatized the
Girondists by the name of the federalists, and charged them with the
design of establishing a federative system in France similar to that of
Switzerland. They also accused them of endeavouring to stir up the
provinces against the capital, and thus held them up to the detestation
of the people of Paris, which could maintain its splendour only by the
union and unity of the whole of the territory. When the Girondists
inveighed against the Mountaineers for the massacres of the 2nd of
September, the latter reproached the former with having, during the
Legislative Assembly, rashly and without cause, declared war against all
Europe.

"The Girondists, at first, appeared to have the upper hand in the
Convention, and they directed that Marat should be brought to trial, and
that proceedings should be instituted against the assassins of
September. But Marat, supported by the Jacobins and the Commune of
Paris, was acquitted by the revolutionary tribunal, and returned in
triumph to the bosom of the assembly.

"The trial of the King had been another apple of discord. The two
parties seemed to proceed in unison, and voted, it is true, for his
death; but the greater part of the Girondists also voted for an appeal
to the people; and here it is difficult to comprehend the reason of
their conduct during that crisis. If they wished to save the king, they
were at liberty to do so; they had only to vote for deportation, exile,
or the adjournment of the question; but to sentence him to death and
make his fate depend upon the will of the people, was, in the highest
degree, absurd and impolitic. They seemed to be desirous, that after the
extinction of the monarchy, France should be torn to pieces by civil
war.

"The general opinion ever since the commencement of the revolution, that
the most audacious and unreasonable faction would always predominate,
was from that moment verified. The Girondists, however, maintained the
contest with courage, and very often had majorities in the assembly
during all the months of March, April, and May. But the party of the
Mountaineers had recourse, in these circumstances, to an expedient which
it had constantly employed. On the 31st of May, the fate of the
Girondists was decided by an insurrection of the sections of Paris.
Twenty-seven were arrested, brought before the revolutionary tribunal,
and sentenced to death; seventy-three were thrown into prison, and from
that period the triumphant Mountain had no obstacles to encounter in the
Convention. Several Girondist deputies took refuge, however, at Caen,
and there raised the standard of insurrection. Lyons, Marseilles,
Bordeaux, Montpellier, and several towns of Brittany, embraced cause of
this party, and also took up arms against the the Convention.

"All these unconnected efforts were of no avail against the capital, and
the Mountain remained in tranquil possession of the national tribune. A
circumstance altogether singular contributed to confirm the
preponderance of Paris. It was the assignats, then the only resource for
supplying the treasury; not a single tax was then paid.

"The provinces learnt with considerable emotion the event of the 31st of
May, and the death of the most celebrated of the Girondist party. The
armies were not agitated by these results; they took no share in the
insurrections of some provinces, and remained all attached to the
Convention and the dominant party at Paris.

"When the partial insurrection of certain towns in favour of the
Girondists was known, all the armies had already taken the oath and
testified their adhesion to the Mountain; besides, in the eyes of
Frenchmen, Paris was France. Neither did the departments of Alsace, la
Moselle, Flanders, Franche Comté, and Dauphiné, where the principal
forces of the republic were quartered, sympathize in the feelings of the
federalist towns.

“The 31st of May deprived France of men of great talents, zealously
attached to liberty, and the principles of the revolution. The
catastrophe might afflict the well disposed, but could not surprise
them. It was impossible for an assembly, which had extricated France
from the critical situation to which she was reduced, to carry on public
business with two parties so inveterately and irreconcileably opposed.
It was necessary for the safety of the republic that one should
extinguish the other, and there can be no doubt that, had the Girondists
obtained the victory, they would have consigned their adversaries to the
scaffold.”

Here the Emperor, who had dictated in his usual way, from memory alone,
without any research, whether he was dissatisfied with the task he had
executed, or for some other reason, stopped short, for the purpose, as
he said, of recommencing a new dictation on the same subject.

                                NOTE II.

"The Convention was established in September, 1792, and terminated in
October, 1795, Its reign, which lasted nearly three years, presents four
eras.

"The 1st, from its commencement to the 31st of May 1793—epoch of the
destruction of the Girondists.

"The 2nd, to March 1794—overthrow of the Commune of Paris.

"The 3rd, to July, 1794—fall of Robespierre.

"The 4th to the 14th Vendémiaire (4th October, 1795)—installation of the
Government of the Directory.

"Its _first era_ consisted of eight months, its second of ten, its third
of four, its fourth of fourteen. Total, three years.

"During its first era the Convention was constantly divided between the
parties of the Mountain and the Gironde.

"Danton, Robespierre, Marat, Collot-d’Herbois, Billaud-Varennes, Carnot,
Heraut de Sechelles, were the leaders of the party of the Mountain.

"Brissot, Condorcet, Vergniaud, Gaudet, Gensonnè, Péthion, Lasource,
Barbaroux, headed the party of the Gironde.

"The two parties were equally hostile to the Bourbons and the royalists.

"The men of the first were distinguished for superior energy, those of
the second for superior talents. They were both the partisans of a
republican establishment. The Mountaineers were desirous of a Republic,
for the purpose of destroying what was in existence before the
Revolution, both men and things. The Girondists were animated by the
infatuation of youthful feeling, which presented at once Athens and Rome
to their view, and revived recollections of sublime antiquity.

"The existence of the mountaineers may be dated from the time of the
Constituent Assembly. They were the firebrands of the clubs so generally
known by the name of Jacobin. The insurrection of the Field of Mars was
planned by them.

"This party did not obtain admission into the Constituent and
Legislative Assemblies.

"The Girondists, who predominated in the legislative, were hostile to
the Constitution of 1794 and to the King. They would not undertake his
defence, and suffered him to be sacrificed to the efforts of the
Mountain, which, however, was also their enemy. It was the Mountaineers
who caused the atrocities of the 20th of June, of the 10th of August,
and of the 2nd of September; they had then no party in the assembly; but
they compelled the Girondists to join them after their victory.

"The _first era_ of the Convention presents the struggle of the
Girondists and Mountaineers; the Girondists prevailed at that time in
consequence of their superior talents, their eloquence, and their
already acquired reputation. The presidents were nearly all Girondists;
they charged the Mountain with the design of destroying the National
Assembly, and substituting in its place a Parisian Dictatorship. They
also reproached it with the massacre of September.

"The Mountain, in its turn, charged them with wishing for a federative
republic like Switzerland, with being hostile to the capital, and with
having, without cause, placed the republic in a state of warfare with
the whole of Europe.

"The Mountain had at its command the Jacobins of Paris, and the greatest
part of the popular societies of the republic; the commune of Paris, the
sections, the revolutionary tribunal, and the lower classes of the
people of the capital were devoted to its interests.

"The Girondists possessed great influence over the departments in
general and the enlightened part of the nation; their partizans were
more numerous among the upper class of society. The Girondists, who had
occupied the left side in the Legislative Assembly, and had shewn such
animosity against the King, the ministers, and the right side, or
moderate party, were forced to shift places, and become in their turn
the right side or moderate party, opposed to the vehement and
overbearing Mountain, which henceforth formed the left side.

"The Mountaineers, working on the plan they had adopted under the
Constituent Assembly, enlisted all the passions in their service, and
demanded, with loud cries, the death of the King. The Girondists might,
by openly defending him, have preserved his life; they had recourse to
the singular system of condemning him, and, after having thus destroyed
the monarchy, they wished the sentence to be confirmed by an appeal to
the people: in other words, they wished to destroy France by the horrors
of a civil war. This false combination ruined them.—Vergniaud, one of
the pillars of their party, proclaimed the sentence of death passed upon
the King.

"The Girondists were so powerful in the Assembly, that several months’
labour and several days’ insurrection were necessary to destroy their
influence in the Convention.

"This party would have governed the Convention and crushed the Mountain,
had its system of conduct been more direct and candid. The
metaphysicians had too weighty a preponderance in it.

"The _second era_ of the Convention is the reign of the Mountain.
Twenty-two of the principal Girondists perished on the scaffold, or fell
by their own hands; seventy-three were thrown into prison. The Mountain,
ruled with absolute power; it created the revolutionary government, and
the Convention in a mass placed itself, of its own accord, under the
yoke of the Committee of Public Safety and of the Revolutionary
Tribunal.

"In this second era, the sittings of the Convention no longer resembled
those of the first; there was an end of discussion and of liberty; it
was the despotism of the Decemvirs. Some of the Deputies governed the
Committees of General Security, of Finance, &c. Others were dispatched
by the Committee of Public Safety to the Armies and the Departments, and
became real Pro-consuls.

"Every month, every week, every day, the government became more
ferocious and sanguinary. All those, in the higher classes of society
who had not emigrated were crowded together in the prisons, as objects
of suspicion, and sent by hundreds to the scaffold.

"After treating in this way every one who was of a noble family, a
priest, a merchant, or a considerable proprietor, the excesses of the
party recoiling upon itself, it ruled the Jacobins and the Commune of
Paris with an iron hand: it enslaved the Convention, and threatened it
with absolute annihilation; it preached up Atheism, and proscribed the
arts, the sciences, and every species of talent. The artists and men of
science were thrown into prison, as objects of suspicion, and there was
a time when the National Library and the Garden of Plants were on the
point of being burnt and laid waste.

"Robespierre and Danton, filled with indignation at these outrages,
united their efforts to put a stop to the frightful progress of the
popular madness. The capuchin Chabot, Bazire, Fabre d’Eglantine, Hebert,
Chaumet, Vincent, and all their associates perished on the scaffold.

"For the first time since the commencement of the Revolution, the people
saw persons put to death as ultra-revolutionary, and no longer as having
wished to stop the Revolution. Their ideas were turned up-side down, and
underwent a real revolution.

"The prisons were filled with sans-culottes, and with all that was
basest in society. It was remarked, that the apostate priests were
numerous in that class.

"The people beheld, without surprise and with joy, the punishment of
those who had until then governed them, and that feeling was a
revolution, which escaped the observation of Robespierre and Danton, and
which they knew not how to convert to their advantage.

"The _third era_ presents a spectacle different from the other two.
Danton and Robespierre had without effort stopped the Revolution, and
put a period to the power of the Commune of Paris; but after their
success they fell out between themselves.

"Danton, Camille des Moulins, Heraut de Sechelles, and Lacroix, were
desirous of going a step farther, and putting an end to the
assassinations of the Revolutionary Tribunal. Danton and Lacroix had
enriched themselves in their mission to Belgium. Camille des Moulins,
who, from the beginning of the Revolution had given himself the title of
the Attorney-General of the Lantern, was captivated and softened down by
a young wife. They had the boldness to demand, that the blow which had
been just struck against Hebert, or the rest of Marat’s party, should be
turned to the benefit of the whole Republic—that no innocent person
should in future be condemned—that the system of terror should be
abolished—and that a Committee of Clemency should be established.

"Billaud-Varennes and Collot-d’Herbois, who took the lead in the
Committee of Public Safety and among the great body of Jacobins,
rejected these demands with indignation and fury; and Robespierre, after
some hesitation, did not dare to support Danton, and made a sacrifice of
him. Danton, Camille des Moulins, Heraut de Sechelles, &c. perished on
the scaffold, to which they were dragged by the whole Committee of
Public Safety, and by the enraged Jacobins. The people were struck with
consternation, and for the first time expressed no sign of satisfaction.

"What Robespierre, however, had not dared to do, and what he could have
easily effected had he supported Danton, he had the presumption to
undertake after the death of Danton. In order to put a period to
Atheism, he caused the existence of God to be proclaimed, and he
endeavoured to reinstate the virtues, the sciences, and the arts.
Billaud-Varennes, Collot-d’Herbois, and Barrere, were struck with horror
at seeing the termination of the revolutionary government. They formed a
coalition with all the representatives, who, in their missions, had
caused the effusion of human blood, and with all the numerous friends
whom Danton had in the Convention, such as Tallien, Fréron, Legendre;
and when Robespierre was bold enough to give a glimpse of his plan for
suppressing the administration of the pro-consuls, and for the necessity
of bringing to justice the base characters, who had rendered the
Revolution odious in the provinces, he was consigned to the scaffold.

"The transactions of the 9th Thermidor constituted, in reality, the
triumph of Collot-d’Herbois and Billaud-Varennes, men more horrible and
bloodthirsty than Robespierre; but that victory could not be obtained
over the Jacobins and the commune, without calling into action the whole
of the citizens; so that, with respect to the middling classes and the
people, the death of Robespierre was the death of the revolutionary
government; and after various oscillations, those who wished to continue
the system of terror and had sacrificed Robespierre, as he had
sacrificed Danton, because he was desirous of softening down and
moderating the revolution, found themselves drawn along with, and
overpowered by, the public opinion.

“During the last ten months, Robespierre frequently complained that he
was rendered odious by having all the massacres, which were perpetrated,
attributed to him. The men who caused his destruction were more
sanguinary and dreadful than he, but the whole nation, which had for a
long time imputed all the assassinations to Robespierre, exclaimed that
it was a triumph over tyranny, and that belief put an end to it.”

Here the dictation ended; the Emperor joined in common conversation, and
as he never resumed it, we are deprived of the fourth era.

                 THE MONITEUR AND LIBERTY OF THE PRESS.

June 13th.—The Emperor had just run over a great many numbers of the
Moniteur. “These Moniteurs,” said he, “so terrible and dangerous to so
many reputations, are uniformly useful and favourable to me alone. It is
with official documents that men of sense and real talents will write
history; now, these documents are full of the spirit of my government,
and to them I make an earnest and solemn appeal.” He added, that he had
made the Moniteur the soul and life-blood of his government, and that it
was the intermediate instrument of his communications with public
opinion, both abroad and at home. Every government had since followed
his example more or less in that respect.

“Whatever serious fault might be committed by any of the high
functionaries employed in the interior, immediately,” said the Emperor,
"an enquiry was set on foot by three Councillors of State. They made
their report to me, confirmed the facts and discussed the principles.
For my own part, I had nothing more to do than to write at the
bottom—‘_Dispatched for execution according to the laws of the republic,
or of the empire._’ My interference was at an end, the public result
accomplished, and popular opinion did justice to the transaction. It was
the most formidable and dreadful of my tribunals. Did any question arise
abroad respecting certain grand political combinations or some delicate
points of diplomacy? The objects were indirectly hinted at in the
Moniteur. They instantly attracted universal attention and became the
topics of general investigation. This conduct was at once the orderly
signal for the adherents of the throne, and at the same time an appeal
to the opinion of all. The Moniteur has been reproached for the acrimony
and virulence of its notes against the enemy. But before we condemn
them, we are bound to take into consideration the benefits they may have
produced, the anxiety with which they occasionally gave the enemy, the
terror with which they struck a hesitating cabinet, the stimulus which
they imparted to our allies, the confidence and audacity with which they
inspired our troops," &c.

The conversation next turned upon the liberty of the press, and the
Emperor asked our opinions. We talked for a long time very idly on the
subject, and threw out a great number of common-place ideas. Some were
hostile to it. “Nothing,” said they, “can resist the liberty of the
press. It is capable of overthrowing every government, of agitating
every society, of destroying every reputation.” “It is only,” observed
others, “its prohibition that is dangerous. If it be restricted, it
becomes a mine that must explode, but if left to itself it is merely an
unbent bow, that can inflict no wound.” Here the Emperor observed, that
he was far from being convinced with regard to that point, but that it
was no longer the question for consideration; that there were
institutions at present, and the liberty of the press was among the
number, on the excellence of which we were no longer called upon to
decide, but solely to determine the possibility of withholding them from
the overbearing influence of popular opinion. He declared, that the
prohibition under a representative government was a gross anachronism, a
downright absurdity. He had, therefore, on his return from the Isle of
Elba, abandoned the press to all its excesses, and he was well assured,
that they had, in no respect, contributed to his recent downfall. When
it was proposed in council, in his presence, to discuss the means of
sheltering the authority of the State from its attacks, he jocosely
remarked, “Gentlemen, it is probably yourselves you wish to protect,
for, with respect to me, I shall henceforth continue a stranger to all
such proceedings. The press has exhausted itself upon me during my
absence, and I now defy it to produce any thing new or provoking against
me.”

THE WAR, AND ROYAL FAMILY OF SPAIN.—FERDINAND AT VALENCEY.—ERRORS IN THE
  AFFAIRS OF SPAIN.—HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THESE EVENTS, &C.—NAPOLEON’S
  ADMIRABLE LETTER TO MURAT.

June 14th.—The Emperor had been ill the whole of the night, and
continued so during the day; he had a foot-bath, and was not inclined to
go out; he dined alone in his apartment, and sent for me towards the
evening.

The Emperor began the conversation, of which the constant subject was
the Spanish war. It has been seen in the notice which I have already
taken of it, that the Emperor took upon himself the whole blame of the
measure. I wish to avoid repetitions as much as possible, and shall,
therefore, allude to those topics only which appeared new to me.

“The old King and Queen,” said the Emperor, "at the moment of the event,
were the objects of the hatred and contempt of their subjects. The
Prince of Asturias conspired against them, forced them to abdicate, and
at once united in his own person the love and hopes of the nation. That
nation was, however, ripe for great changes and demanded them with
energy. I enjoyed vast popularity in the country, and it was in that
state of things that all these personages met at Bayonne; the old king
calling upon me for vengeance against his son, and the young prince
soliciting my protection against his father, and imploring a wife at my
hands. I resolved to convert this singular occasion to my advantage,
with the view of delivering myself from that branch of the Bourbons, of
continuing in my own dynasty the family system of Louis XIV. and of
binding Spain to the destinies of France. Ferdinand was sent to
Valencey, the old king to Marseilles, as he wished, and my brother
Joseph went to reign at Madrid with a liberal constitution, adopted by a
junta of the Spanish nation, which had come to receive it at Bayonne.

“It seems to me,” continued he, "that Europe, and even France, has never
had a just idea of Ferdinand’s situation at Valencey. There is a strange
misunderstanding in the world with respect to the treatment he
experienced, and still more so, with respect to his wishes and personal
opinions as to that situation. The fact is, that he was scarcely guarded
at Valencey, and that he did not wish to escape. If any plots were
contrived to favour his evasion, he was the first to make them known. An
Irishman (Baron de Colli) gained access to his person, and offered, in
the name of George the Third, to carry him off; but Ferdinand, so far
from embracing the offer, instantly communicated it to the proper
authority.

“His applications to me for a wife at my hands were incessant. He
spontaneously wrote to me letters of congratulation upon every event
that occurred in my favour. He had addressed proclamations to the
Spaniards recommending their submission; he had recognized Joseph. All
these were circumstances which might, indeed, have been considered as
forced upon him; but he requested from him the insignia of his grand
order; he tendered to me the services of his brother, Don Carlos, to
take the command of the Spanish regiments, which were marching to
Russia,—proceedings to which he was, in no respect, obliged. To sum up
all, he earnestly solicited my permission to visit my court at Paris,
and if I did not lend myself to a spectacle, which would have astonished
Europe, by displaying the full consolidation of my power, it was because
the important circumstances which called me abroad, and my frequent
absence from the capital, deprived me of the proper opportunity.”

About the beginning of a year, at one of the Emperor’s levees, I
happened to be next to the Chamberlain, Count d’Arberg, who had been
doing duty at Valencey, near the persons of the princes of Spain. When
the Emperor approached, he enquired if these princes conducted
themselves with propriety, and added; “You have brought me a very pretty
letter; but between ourselves, it was you who wrote it for them.”
D’Arberg assured him, that he was altogether unacquainted even with the
nature of its contents. “Well,” said the Emperor, “a son could not write
more cordially to his father.”

“When our situation in Spain,” observed the Emperor, “proved dangerous,
I more than once proposed to Ferdinand to return and reign over his
people; that we should openly carry on war against each other: and that
the contest should be decided by the fate of arms.” “No,” answered the
prince, who seems to have been well advised, and never deviated from
that way of thinking. “My country is agitated by political disturbances;
I should but multiply its embarrassments: I might become their victim,
and lose my head upon the scaffold. I remain; but, if you will choose a
wife for me, if you will grant me your protection and the support of
your arms, I shall set out and prove a faithful ally.”

"At a later period, during our disasters, and towards the end of 1813, I
yielded to that proposal, and Ferdinand’s marriage with Joseph’s eldest
daughter was decided; but circumstances were then no longer the same,
and Ferdinand was desirous that the marriage should be deferred. “You
can no longer,” he observed, support me with your arms, and I ought not
to make my wife a title of exclusion in the eyes of my people." “He left
me,” continued the Emperor, “as it seemed, with every intention of good
faith, for he adhered to the principles which he avowed on his
departure, until the events of Fontainebleau.”

The Emperor declared that, had the affairs of 1814 turned out
differently, he would unquestionably have accomplished his marriage with
Joseph’s daughter.

The Emperor, in reverting to these affairs, said, that the impolicy of
his own conduct was irrevocably decided by the results; but that
independently of this kind of proof, depending upon consequences, he had
to reproach himself with serious faults in the execution of his plans.
One of the greatest was that of considering the dethronement of the
dynasty of the Bourbons as a matter of importance, and of maintaining as
the basis of this system, for its successor, precisely that man, who
from his qualities and character, was certain to cause its failure.

During the meeting at Bayonne, Ferdinand’s former preceptor and his
principal counsellor (Escoiquiz) at once perceiving the vast projects
entertained by the Emperor, and pleading the cause of his master, said
to him: "You wish to create for yourself a kind of Herculean labour,
when you have but child’s play in hand. You wish to rid yourselves of
the Bourbons of Spain; why should you be apprehensive of them? They have
ceased to exist; they are no longer French. You have nothing to fear
from them; they are altogether aliens with respect to your nation and
your manners. You have here Madame de Montmorency, and some new ladies
of your Court; they are not more acquainted with the one than with the
other, and view them all with equal indifference." The Emperor
unfortunately formed a different resolution.

I took the liberty of telling him, I had been assured by some Spaniards,
that, if the national pride had been respected, and the Spanish junta
held at Madrid instead of Bayonne, or even, if Charles IV. had been sent
off and Ferdinand retained, the revolution would have been popular, and
affairs would have taken another turn. The Emperor entertained no doubt
of it, and agreed that the enterprize had been imprudently undertaken,
and that many circumstances might have been better conducted. “Charles
IV.,” said he, "was, however, too stale for the Spaniards. Ferdinand
should have been considered in the same light. The plan most worthy of
me, and the best suited to my project, would have been a kind of
mediation like that of Switzerland. I ought to have given a liberal
constitution to the Spanish nation, and charged Ferdinand with its
execution. If he had acted with good faith, Spain must have prospered
and harmonized with our new manners. The great object would have been
obtained, and France would have acquired an intimate ally and an
addition of power truly formidable. Had Ferdinand, on the contrary,
proved faithless to his new engagements, the Spaniards themselves would
not have failed to dismiss him, and would have applied to me for a ruler
in his place.

“At all events,” concluded the Emperor, "that unfortunate war in Spain
was a real affliction, and the first cause of the calamities of France.
After my conferences at Erfurt with Alexander, England ought to have
been compelled to make peace by the force of arms or of reason. She had
lost the esteem of the continent; her attack upon Copenhagen had
disgusted the public mind, while I distinguished myself at that moment
by every contrary advantage, when that disastrous affair of Spain
presented itself to effect a sudden change against me and reinstate
England in the public estimation. She was enabled, from that moment, to
continue the war; the trade with South America was thrown open to her;
she formed an army for herself in the peninsula, and next became the
victorious agent, the main point, of all the plots which were hatched on
the continent. All this effected my ruin.

"I was then assailed with imputations, for which, however, I had given
no cause. History will do me justice. I was charged in that affair with
perfidy, with laying snares, and with bad faith, and yet I was
completely innocent. Whatever may have been said to the contrary, never
have I broken any engagement, or violated my promise, either with regard
to Spain or any other power.

"The world will one day be convinced, that in the principal transactions
relative to Spain I was completely a stranger to all the domestic
intrigues of its Court: that I broke no promise made either to Charles
IV. or to Ferdinand VII.: that I violated no engagement with the father
or the son: that I made use of no falsehoods to entice them both to
Bayonne, but that they both strove which should be the first there. When
I saw them at my feet and was enabled to form a correct opinion of their
total incapacity, I beheld with compassion the fate of a great people; I
eagerly seized the singular opportunity, held out to me by fortune, for
regenerating Spain, rescuing her from the yoke of England, and
intimately uniting her with our system. It was, in my conception, laying
the fundamental basis of the tranquillity, and security of Europe. But I
was far from employing for that purpose, as it has been reported, any
base and paltry stratagems. If I erred, it was, on the contrary, by
daring openness and extraordinary energy. Bayonne was not the scene of
premeditated ambush, but of a vast master-stroke of state policy. I
could have preserved myself from these imputations by a little
hypocrisy, or by giving up the Prince of the Peace to the fury of the
people; but the idea appeared horrible to me, and struck me as if I was
to receive the price of blood. Besides, it must also be acknowledged
that Murat did me a great deal of mischief in the whole affair.

"Be that as it may, I disdained having recourse to crooked and
common-place expedients—I found myself so powerful!—I dared to strike
from a situation too exalted. I wished to act like Providence, which, of
its own accord, applies remedies to the wretchedness of mankind, by
means occasionally violent, but for which it is unaccountable to human
judgment.

“I candidly confess, however, that I engaged very inconsiderately in the
whole affair; its immorality must have shewn itself too openly, its
injustice too glaringly, and the transactions taken altogether, present
a disgusting aspect, more particularly since my failure; for the outrage
is no longer seen but in its hideous nakedness, stripped of all
loftiness of idea, and of the numerous benefits which it was my
intention to confer. Posterity, however, would have extolled it had I
succeeded, and perhaps with reason, on account of its vast and happy
results. Such is our lot, and such our judgment in this world!... But I
once more declare, that, in no instance was there any breach of faith,
any perfidy or falsehood, and, what is more, there was no occasion for
them.” Here the Emperor resumed, in its totality and in its origin, the
history of the affair of Spain, repeating many things which have been
already noticed.

“The Court and the reigning family,” said the Emperor, "were split into
two parties. The one was that of the monarch, blindly governed by his
favourite, the Prince of the Peace, who had constituted himself the real
king; the other was that of the heir presumptive, headed by his
preceptor, Escoiquiz, who aspired to the government. These two parties
were equally desirous of my support, and made me the most flattering
promises. I was, no doubt, determined to derive every possible advantage
from their situation.

"The favourite, in order to continue in office, as well as to shelter
himself from the vengeance of the son, in case of the father’s death,
offered me, in the name of Charles IV. to effect, in concert, the
conquest of Portugal, reserving as an asylum for himself, the
sovereignty of the Algarves.

"On the other hand, the prince of the Asturias wrote to me privately,
without his father’s knowledge, soliciting a wife of my choice, and
imploring my protection.

"I concluded an agreement with the former, and returned no answer to the
latter. My troops were already admitted into the Peninsula, when the son
took advantage of a commotion to make his father abdicate and to reign
in his place.

"It has been foolishly imputed to me, that I took part in all these
intrigues, but so far was I from having any knowledge of them, that the
last event, in particular, disconcerted all my projects with the father,
in consequence of which my troops were already in the heart of Spain.
The two parties were aware, from that moment, that I could and ought to
be the arbiter between them. The dethroned monarch and the son had
recourse to me, the one for the purpose of obtaining vengeance, and the
other, for the purpose of being recognised. They both hastened to plead
their cause before me, and they were urged on by their respective
councillors, those very persons who absolutely governed them, and who
saw no means of preserving their own lives but by throwing themselves
into my arms.

"The Prince of the Peace, who had narrowly escaped being murdered,
easily persuaded Charles IV. and his queen to undertake the journey, as
they had themselves been in danger of falling victims to the fury of the
multitude.

“On his part, the preceptor Escoiquiz, the real author of all the
calamities of Spain, alarmed at seeing Charles IV. protest against his
abdication, and in dread of the scaffold, unless his pupil triumphed,
exerted every means to influence the young King. This Canon, who had
besides a very high opinion of his own talents, did not despair of
making an impression on my decisions by his arguments, and of inducing
me to acknowledge Ferdinand, making me a tender, on his own account, of
his services to govern, altogether under my control, as effectually as
the Prince of the Peace could, in the name of Charles IV. And it must be
owned,” said the Emperor, "that, had I listened to several of his
reasons, and adopted some of his ideas, it had been much better for me.

"When I had them all assembled at Bayonne, I felt a confidence in my
political system, to which I never before had the presumption to aspire.
I had not made my combinations, but I took advantage of the moment. I
here found the Gordian knot before me, and I cut it. I proposed to
Charles IV. and the Queen, to resign the crown of Spain to me, and to
live quietly in France. They agreed, I may say, almost with joy, to the
proposal, so inveterately were they exasperated against their son, and
so earnestly did they and their favourite wish to enjoy, for the future,
tranquillity and safety. The Prince of the Asturias made no
extraordinary resistance to the plan, but neither violence nor threats
were employed against him; and if he was influenced by fear, which I am
very willing to believe, that could only be his concern.

"There you have in very few words, the complete historical sketch of the
affair of Spain; whatever may be said, or written on it must amount to
that; and you see that there could be no occasion for me to have
recourse to paltry tricks, to falsehoods, to breaches of faith, or
violation of engagements. In order to establish my guilt, it would be
necessary to shew my inclination to degrade myself gratuitously; but of
that propensity I have never furnished an instance.

"For the rest, the instant my decision was known, the crowd of
intriguers who swarm in every court, and even those among them who had
been the most active in producing the misfortunes of their country,
strove to curry favour with Joseph, as they had done with Charles IV.
and Ferdinand VII. They watched, with extraordinary diligence, the
progress of events, and changed sides at a later period, in proportion
as difficulties encreased, and our disasters approached. They pursued
the plan so successfully, that they are the persons, who, at this
moment, govern Ferdinand. And, what is truly horrible, the better to
secure their influence, they did not hesitate to impute whatever was
odious and criminal in past calamities, to the mass of _simpletons_,
whom they proscribed and banished;—of those men naturally well-disposed,
and who, in principle, decidedly blamed Ferdinand’s journey. Of this
latter class, several who opposed the journey afterwards took the oath
of allegiance to Joseph, who seemed then to be identified with the
happiness and tranquillity of their country, and continued faithful to
him, until the grand catastrophe that drove him from the throne.

“It would be difficult to accumulate a greater mass of impudence and
baseness than that exhibited by all those intriguers, the principal
performers in that grand scene, which, by the way, extenuates the
degradation to which similar acts of vileness have reduced France in the
eyes of Europe. It is evident, that they do not belong to her
exclusively. Intriguing, ambitious, rapacious men, are every where to be
found, and are every where the same. Individuals alone are guilty;
nations cannot incur the responsibility. Their only disadvantage arises
from their being forced to witness these misdeeds. Unhappy the country
which becomes the scene of them!”

At present, the affair of Spain is perfectly known, thanks to the
writings of the principal actors, the canon Escoiquiz, the minister
Cevallos, and others, but above all, to those of the worthy and
respectable M. Llorente, who, under the anagrammatic signature of
Nellerto, has published the Memoirs of that time, sanctioned by all the
official documents. The opposite contradictions of the two first, their
mutual disputes, the assertions and denials of their contemporaries,
have reduced their writings to their real value, by stripping them of
whatever was erroneous, false, or even fabricated. The result is, that
in the opinion of every cool and impartial judge, they all concur, even
involuntarily, in confirming the justificatory assertions advanced by
Napoleon; not but that they display that difference which must
inevitably arise from the diversity of party-interests; but solely
because neither of them actually establishes the grounds of positive
crimination, nor furnishes any official document by which it can be
proved, while all those which exist attest and establish the contrary.

It may also be remarked in the history of those transactions, which must
now be considered as genuine, that England herself was altogether a
stranger to them, at least with respect to their origin, a fact which
was far from Napoleon’s way of thinking, who charged the English at the
time with being the first cause of all the intrigues, and who still
persevered in the accusation at St. Helena: so accustomed was he to
discover them at the bottom of every plot formed against him.

With respect to this affair of Spain, I have further to notice a letter
from the Emperor, which throws more light upon the subject than volumes.
It is admirable, and the events which followed stamp it as a
masterpiece. It exhibits the rapidity, the eagle-eyed view, with which
Napoleon formed his opinion of men and things.

Unfortunately, it also shews how much the execution of the inferiors,
employed during the greater part of the time, destroyed the finest and
most exalted conceptions; and in that point of view this letter remains
a very precious document for history. Its date renders it prophetic.

                                                  “29th March, 1808.

“Monsieur le Grand Duc de Berg—I am afraid lest you should deceive me
with respect to the situation of Spain, and lest you should also deceive
yourself. Events have been singularly complicated by the transaction of
the 20th of March. I find myself very much perplexed.

“_Do not believe that you are about to attack a disarmed nation, and
that you can, by a mere parade of your troops, effect the subjugation of
Spain._ The revolution of the 20th of March proves, that the Spaniards
possess energy. You have to contend with a new people; it has all the
courage, and will display all the enthusiasm shewn by men, who are not
worn out by political passions.

“The aristocracy and the clergy are the masters of Spain. If their
privileges and existence be threatened, they will bring into the field
against us levies en masse, that may perpetuate the war. I am not
without my partisans; but if I shew myself as a conqueror they will
abandon me.

“The Prince of the Peace is detested, because he is accused of having
betrayed Spain to France. This is the grievance which has assisted
Ferdinand’s usurpation. The popular is the weakest party.

“The Prince of the Asturias does not possess a single quality requisite
for the head of a nation. That will not prevent his being ranked as a
hero, in order that he may be opposed to us. I will have no violence
employed against the personages of this family. It can never answer any
purpose to excite hatred and inflame animosity. Spain has a hundred
thousand men under arms, more than are necessary to carry on an internal
war with advantage. Scattered over several parts of the country, they
may serve as rallying points for a total insurrection of the monarchy.

“I lay before you all the obstacles which must inevitably happen. There
are others of which you must be aware. England will not allow the
opportunity to escape her without multiplying our embarrassments. She
daily sends packet-boats to the forces, which she maintains on the
coasts of Portugal and in the Mediterranean; and she enlists in her
service Sicilians and Portuguese.

“The Royal Family not having left Spain for the purpose of establishing
itself in its American colonies, the state of the country can be changed
only by a revolution. It is, perhaps, of all others in Europe, that
which is the least prepared for one. Those who perceive the monstrous
defects of that government, and the anarchy which has been substituted
for the legitimate authority, are the fewest in number. Those defects
and that anarchy are converted to their own advantage by the greatest
number.

“I can, consistently with the interests of my empire, do a great deal of
good to Spain. What are the best means to be adopted?

“Shall I go to Madrid? Shall I take upon myself the office of Grand
Protector in deciding between the father and the son? It seems to me a
matter of difficulty to support Charles IV. on the throne. His
government and his favourite are so very unpopular, that they could not
maintain themselves for three months.

“Ferdinand is the enemy of France, and to that consideration he has been
indebted for the crown. His elevation to the throne would be favourable
to the factions, which for five-and-twenty years have longed for the
destruction of France. A family alliance would be but a feeble tie.
_Queen Elizabeth and other French princesses_ perished miserably when
they could be immolated with impunity to the atrocious spirit of
vengeance. My opinion is, that nothing should be hurried on, and that
our measures ought to be regulated by events as they occur. It will be
necessary to strengthen the _corps d’armée_ which will be stationed on
the frontiers of Portugal, and wait....

“I do not approve of your Imperial Highness’s conduct in so
precipitately making yourself master of Madrid. The army ought to have
been kept ten leagues from the capital. You had no assurance that the
people and the magistracy were about to recognise Ferdinand, without a
struggle. The Prince of the Peace must, of course, have partisans among
those employed in the public service; there is also an habitual
attachment to the old King, which might lead to unpleasant consequences.
Your entrance into Madrid, by alarming the Spaniards, has powerfully
assisted Ferdinand. I have ordered Savary to attend the new King, and
observe what passes. He will concert matters with your Imperial
Highness. I shall hereafter decide upon the measures necessary to be
pursued. In the mean time, I think it proper to prescribe the following
line of conduct to you:

“You will not pledge me to an interview, _in Spain_, with Ferdinand,
unless you consider the state of things to be such that I ought to
recognise him King of Spain. You will behave with attention and respect
to the King, the Queen, and Prince Godoy. You will require for them, and
pay them, the same honours as formerly. You will manage matters so as to
prevent the Spaniards from entertaining any suspicions of the course I
shall pursue. You will find no difficulty in this, as I know nothing
about it myself.

“You will make the nobility and clergy understand that, if the
interference of France be requisite in the affairs of Spain, their
privileges and immunities shall be respected. You will assure them that
the Emperor wishes for the improvement of the political institutions of
Spain, in order to place her in a relative state to that of civilized
Europe, and to deliver her from the administration of favouritism. You
will tell the magistrates and the inhabitants of the towns and the
enlightened classes, that the machine of the government needs
reconstructing, that Spain wants a system of laws calculated for the
protection of the people against the tyranny and usurpations of
feudality, and of establishments which may revive industry, agriculture,
and the arts. You will describe to them the state of tranquillity and
ease enjoyed by France, notwithstanding the wars in which she has been
constantly involved, and the splendour of religion, which owes its
establishment to the Concordat I have signed with the Pope. You will
explain to them the advantages which they may derive from political
regeneration—order and peace at home, respect and influence abroad. Such
should be the spirit of your conversation and your letters. Do not
hazard any thing hastily. I can wait at Bayonne, I can cross the
Pyrenees, and, strengthening myself towards Portugal, I can go and
conduct the war in that quarter.

“I shall take care of your particular interests, do not think of them
yourself. Portugal will be at my disposal. Let no powerful object engage
you and influence your conduct; that would be injurious to me, and would
be still more hurtful to yourself.

“You are too hasty in your instructions of the 14th; the march you order
General Dupont to take is too rapid, on account of the event of the 19th
of March. They must be altered; you will make new arrangements; you will
receive instructions from my Minister for Foreign Affairs.

“I enjoin the maintenance of the strictest discipline; the slightest
faults must not go unpunished. The inhabitants must be treated with the
greatest attention. Above all, the churches and convents must be
respected.

“The army must avoid all misunderstanding with the corps and detachments
of the Spanish army; there must not be a single flash in the pan on
either side.

“Let Solano march beyond Badajos, but watch his movements. Do you
yourself trace out the marches of my army, that it may be always kept at
a distance of several leagues from the Spanish corps. Should hostilities
take place, all would be lost.

“The fate of Spain can alone be decided by political views and by
negociation. I charge you to avoid all explanation with Solano, as well
as with the other Spanish generals and governors. You will send me two
expresses daily. In case of events of superior interest, you will
despatch orderly officers. You will immediately send back the
Chamberlain de T——, the bearer of this despatch, and give him a detailed
report.

                               “I pray God, M. le Grand Duc de Berg, &c.

                                        (Signed)         "NAPOLEON.”

June 15th.—The weather was superb; we took an airing in our calash, and
observed very near the shore a large vessel, which seemed to manœuvre
in a singular manner. We took her from her appearance to be the
Newcastle, which had been for some time expected to relieve the
Northumberland; but she was only one of the Company’s ships.

During part of the day, the Emperor, after running over a great number
of topics, came at length to mention several persons who, were they at
liberty, he said, would join him at St. Helena, and he undertook to
explain the motives by which they might be influenced. From this
subject, he was led to touch upon the motives of those who were about
him. “Bertrand,” said he, "is henceforth identified with my fate. It is
an historical fact. Gourgaud was my first orderly officer, he is my own
work, he is my child. Montholon is Semonville’s son, brother-in-law to
Joubert, a child of the revolution and of camps. But you, my good
friend," said he to the fourth, “you,” and after a moment’s thought, he
resumed; “you, my good friend, let us know by what extraordinary chance
you find yourself here?” The answer was, “Sire, by the influence of my
happy stars, and for the honour of the emigrants.”

ARTICLES SENT FROM ENGLAND.—THE EMPEROR’s DETERMINATION TO PROHIBIT THE
  USE OF COTTON IN FRANCE.—THE CONFERENCES OF TILSIT.—THE QUEEN OF
  PRUSSIA.—THE KING.—THE EMPEROR ALEXANDER.—ANECDOTES, &C.

June 16th.—The weather was delightful; the Emperor entered my apartment
about ten o’clock. I was employed in dressing myself, and also in
dictating my Journal to my son. The Emperor cast his eye over it for a
few instants, and said nothing; he left it to look at some drawings.
They were topographical sketches, executed with the pen, of some of the
battles in Italy, by my son, and we felt pleasure in reserving them as
an agreeable surprise for the Emperor. We had, until then, been employed
upon them in secret.

I followed the Emperor to the garden; he talked a great deal on the
articles that had been just sent to us from England, and which chiefly
consisted of furniture. He exposed the ill-grace and awkwardness of
those who had been employed to deliver them to us. He observed that, in
presenting even what would have been most agreeable to us, they found
means to hurt our feelings. He was on that account determined not to
make use of them, and he declined accepting two fowling-pieces, which
were particularly intended for him. The Emperor breakfasted in the open
air, and we were all invited to his table.

The conversation turning on fashions and dress, the Emperor said that,
at one period, he had resolved to prohibit the use of cotton in France,
for the more effectual encouragement of the lawn and cambric trade of
our towns in Flanders. The Empress Josephine was shocked at the idea,
which she decidedly opposed, and it was given up.

The Emperor was in a happy humour for conversation, and the weather was
very mild and tolerably pleasant. He began walking in the kind of alley
which runs perpendicularly in front of the house. The conversation
turned on the celebrated epoch of Tilsit, and the following are the
interesting particulars which I collected.

The Emperor remarked, that, had the Queen of Prussia arrived at the
commencement of the negociations, she might have exercised considerable
influence with respect to the result. Happily, she arrived when they
were sufficiently advanced to enable the Emperor to decide upon their
conclusion four-and-twenty hours afterwards. The King, it was thought,
had prevented her early appearance, in consequence of a rising jealousy
against a great personage, which was confidently stated, said the
Emperor, “not to have been destitute of some slight ground.”

The moment of her arrival, the Emperor paid her a visit. “The Queen of
Prussia,” said he, “had been very beautiful, but she was beginning to
lose some of the charms of her youth.”

The Emperor declared, that the Queen received him like Mademoiselle
Duchesnois in the character of Chimene, thrown back into a grand
attitude, demanding, calling aloud for, _justice_. In short, it was
altogether a theatrical scene: the representation was truly tragic. He
was unable to speak for an instant, and thought the only way of
extricating himself was that of bringing back the business to the tone
of regular comedy, which he attempted by presenting her with a chair,
and gently forcing her to be seated. She proceeded, nevertheless, in the
most pathetic tone. “Prussia,” she exclaimed, “had been blinded with
respect to her power;—she had dared to contend with a hero, to oppose
herself to the destinies of France, to neglect his auspicious
friendship; she was deservedly punished for it. The glory of the great
Frederic, his memory, and his inheritance had puffed up the pride of
Prussia, and had caused her ruin!” She solicited, supplicated, implored.
Magdeburg, in particular, was the object of her efforts and wishes. The
Emperor kept his ground as well as he could. Fortunately, the husband
made his appearance. The Queen reproved, with an expressive look, the
unseasonable interruption, and shewed some pettishness. In fact, the
King attempted to take part in the conversation, spoiled the whole
affair, “and I was,” said the Emperor, “set at liberty.”

The Emperor entertained the Queen at dinner. She played off, said he,
all her wit against me; she had a great deal; all her manners, which
were very fascinating; all her coquetry; she was not without charms.
“But I was determined not to yield. I found it necessary, however, to
keep a great command over myself, that I might continue exempt from all
kind of engagement, and every expression, which might be taken in a
doubtful sense, and the more so, because I was carefully watched, and
particularly by Alexander.” Just before sitting down to dinner Napoleon
took from a flower-stand a very beautiful rose, which he presented to
the Queen. She at first expressed by the motion of her hand a kind of
prepared refusal; but suddenly recollecting herself, she said; _Yes, but
at least with Magdeburg_. The Emperor replied, “But ... I must observe
to your Majesty, that it is I who present, and you, who are about to
receive it.” The dinner and the remainder of the time passed over in
that manner.

The Queen was seated at table between the two Emperors, who rivalled
each other in gallantry. She was placed near Alexander’s best ear; with
one he can scarcely hear at all. The evening came, and, the Queen having
retired, the Emperor, who had shown the most engaging attentions to his
guests, but, who had at the same time, been often driven to an
extremity, resolved to come to a point. He sent for M. de Talleyrand,
and Prince Kourakin, talked big to them, and letting fly, continued he,
some hard words, observed, that, after all, a woman and a piece of
gallantry ought not to alter a system conceived for the destiny of a
great people, and that he insisted upon the immediate conclusion of the
negociations, and the signing of the treaty; which took place according
to his orders. “Thus,” said he, "the Queen of Prussia’s conversation
advanced the treaty by a week or a fortnight."

The Queen was preparing to renew her attacks the next day, and was
indignant when she heard that the treaty was signed. She wept a great
deal, and determined to see the Emperor Napoleon no more. She would not
accept a second invitation to dinner. Alexander was himself obliged to
prevail upon her. She complained most bitterly, and maintained, that
Napoleon had broken his word. But Alexander had been always present. He
had even been a dangerous witness, ready to give evidence of the
slightest action or word on the part of Napoleon in her favour. “He has
made you no promise,” was his observation to her; “if you can prove the
contrary, I here pledge myself, as between man and man, to make him keep
his promise, and he will do so, I am convinced.”—"But he has given me to
understand," said she, ... “No,” replied Alexander, “and you have
nothing to reproach him with.” She came at length. Napoleon, who had no
longer any occasion to be on his guard against her, redoubled his
attentions. She played off, for a few moments, the airs of an offended
coquette, and when the dinner was over, and she was about to retire,
Napoleon presented his hand, and conducted her to the middle of the
staircase, where he stopped. She squeezed his hand, and said with a kind
of tenderness; “Is it possible, that after having had the honour of
being so near to the hero of the century and of history, he will not
leave me the power and satisfaction of being enabled to assure him, that
he has attached me to him for life?”—"Madam," replied the Emperor in a
serious tone, “I am to be pitied; it is the result of my unhappy stars.”
He then took leave of her. When she reached her carriage, she threw
herself into it in tears; sent for Duroc, whom she highly esteemed,
renewed all her complaints to him, and said, pointing to the palace;
“There is a place in which I have been cruelly deceived!”

“The Queen of Prussia,” said the Emperor, “was unquestionably gifted
with many happy resources; she possessed a great deal of information and
had many excellent capabilities. It was she who really reigned for more
than fifteen years. She also, in spite of my dexterity and all my
exertions, took the lead in conversation, and constantly maintained the
ascendancy. She touched, perhaps, too often upon her favourite topic,
but she did so, however, with great plausibility and without giving the
slightest cause of uneasiness. It must be confessed that she had an
important object in view, and that the time was short and precious.”

“One of the high contracting parties,” said the Emperor, “had frequently
assured her, that she ought to have come in the beginning or not at all,
and observed that, for his part, he had done every thing in his power to
induce her to come at once. It was suspected,” continued the Emperor,
“that he had a personal motive to gratify by her coming; but, on the
other hand, the husband had a motive equally personal in opposing it.”
Napoleon believed him to have been very kind and a sincere friend in the
business.

“The king of Prussia,” said the Emperor, "had requested his audience of
leave on that very day, but I postponed it for four-and-twenty hours, at
the secret entreaty of Alexander. The king of Prussia never forgave me
for putting off that audience; so clearly did it seem to him, that Royal
Majesty was insulted by my refusal.

“Another heavy charge against me, and of which he has never been able to
divest his feelings, was that of having violated, as he said, his
territory of Anspach in our campaign of Austerlitz. In all our
subsequent interviews, however important the subjects of our discussion,
he laid them all aside for the purpose of proving that I had really
violated his territory of Anspach. He was wrong; but in short, it was
his conviction, and his resentment was that of an honest man. His wife,
however, was vexed at it, and wished him to pursue a higher system of
politics.”

Napoleon reproached himself with a real fault, in allowing the king of
Prussia’s presence at Tilsit. His first determination was to prevent his
coming. He would then have been less bound to shew any attention to his
interests. He might have kept Silesia, he might have aggrandized Saxony
with it, and have probably reserved for himself a different kind of
destiny. He further remarked: “I learn, that the politicians of the
present day find great fault with my treaty of Tilsit; they have
discovered, that I had, by that means, placed Europe at the mercy of the
Russians; but if I had succeeded at Moscow, and it is now known how very
near I was, they would, no doubt, have admired us for having, on the
contrary, by that treaty, placed the Russians at the mercy of Europe. I
entertained great designs with respect to the Germans.... But I failed,
and therefore I was wrong. This is according to every rule of
justice....”

Almost every day, at Tilsit, the two Emperors and the King rode out on
horseback together, but, said Napoleon, “the latter was always awkward
and unlucky.” The Prussians were visibly mortified by it. Napoleon was
constantly between the two sovereigns; but either the King fell behind,
or jostled and incommoded Napoleon. He shewed the same awkwardness on
their return: the two Emperors dismounted in an instant, and took each
other by the hand to go up stairs together. But, as the honours were
done by Napoleon, he could not enter without first seeing the King pass.
It was sometimes necessary to wait for him a long time, and, as the
weather was often rainy, it happened that the two Emperors got wet on
the king’s account, to the great dissatisfaction of all the spectators.

“This awkwardness,” said the Emperor, “was the more glaring, as
Alexander possesses all the graces, and is equal, in elegance of
manners, to the most polished and amiable ornaments of our Parisian
drawing-rooms. The latter was at times so tired of his companion, who
seemed lost in his own vexations, or in something else, that we mutually
agreed on breaking up our common meeting to get rid of him. We separated
immediately after dinner, under the pretence of some particular
business; but Alexander and I met shortly afterwards, to take tea with
one another, and we then continued in conversation until midnight, and
even beyond it.”

Alexander and Napoleon met again some time after at Erfurt, and
exchanged the most striking testimonies of affection. Alexander
expressed with earnestness the sentiments of tender friendship and real
admiration which he entertained for Napoleon. They passed some days
together in the enjoyment of the charms of perfect intimacy and of the
most familiar communications of private life. “We were,” said the
Emperor, “two young men of quality, who, in their common pleasures, had
no secret from each other.”

Napoleon had sent for the most distinguished performers of the French
Theatre. A celebrated actress, Mademoiselle B——, attracted the attention
of his guest, who had a momentary fancy to get acquainted with her. He
asked his companion whether any inconvenience was likely to be the
result. “None,” answered the latter; “only,” added he, intentionally,
“it is a certain and rapid mode of making yourself known to all Paris.
After to-morrow, post-day, the most minute details will be dispatched,
and in a short time, not a statuary at Paris but will be qualified to
give a model of your person from head to foot.” The danger of such a
kind of publicity appeased the monarch’s rising passion; “for,” observed
Napoleon, “he was very circumspect with regard to that point, and he
recollected no doubt the old adage, When the mask falls, the hero
disappears.”

The Emperor assured us that, had it been his wish, Alexander would
certainly have given him his sister in marriage; his politics would have
dictated the match, even had his inclination been against it. He was
petrified when he heard of the marriage with Austria, and
exclaimed—"This consigns me to my native forests." If he seemed to
shuffle at first, it was because some time was necessary to enable him
to come to a decision. His sister was very young, and the consent of his
mother was requisite. This was settled by Paul’s will, and the
Empress-mother was one of Napoleon’s bitterest enemies. She believed all
the absurdities, all the ridiculous stories, which had been circulated
concerning him. “How,” she exclaimed, "can I give my daughter to a man
who is unfit to be any woman’s husband? Shall another man take
possession of my daughter’s bed, if it be necessary, that she should
have children? She is not formed for such a fate."—"Mother," said
Alexander, “can you be so credulous as to believe the calumnies of
London and the insinuations of the saloons of Paris? If that be the only
difficulty, if it be that alone which gives you pain, I answer for him,
and many others have it in their power to answer for him with me.”

"If Alexander’s affection for me was sincere," said the Emperor, “it was
alienated from me by the force of intrigue. Certain persons, M——, or
others, at the instigation of T——, lost no seasonable opportunity of
mentioning instances of my turning him into ridicule, and they assured
him, that at Tilsit and Erfurt, he no sooner turned his back than I took
the opportunity of laughing at his expense. Alexander is very
susceptible, and they must have easily soured his mind. It is certain,
that he made bitter complaints of it at Vienna during the congress, and
yet nothing was more false; he pleased me, and I loved him.”

S——, one of Napoleon’s aides-de-camp, was sent immediately after the
treaty of Tilsit to Alexander at Petersburg, and was loaded with
favours. The efforts and liberality of Alexander were inexhaustible to
render himself agreeable to his new ally.

This same aide-de-camp became afterwards minister of the police, and in
1814, soon after the restoration, he is said to have made a striking
allusion to his mission in Russia. A person deeply in the confidence of
the King, addressing him at the Tuileries, in a manner altogether
careless and unreserved, said, “Now that all is over, you may speak out;
pray, who was your agent at Hartwell?” (This was, as every one knows,
the residence of Louis XVIII. in England.) S——, astonished at the want
of delicacy evinced by M. de B——, answered with dignity:—"M. le Comte,
the Emperor considered the asylum of kings as an inviolable sanctuary.
It was a principle which he impressed upon his police and we adhered to
it. We have since learnt, that the same conduct was not observed with
respect to him. But you, Sir, should entertain less doubt upon the
subject than any other person. When I arrived at Petersburg, you were
there on the part of the king. The Emperor Alexander, in the first
warmth of his reconciliation, acquainted me with every thing that
concerned you, and asked me whether it was the wish of my government
that you should be ordered to leave his dominions. I had received no
instructions upon that head. I wrote for them to the Emperor. His answer
was, by return of courier, that he was satisfied with the sincere
friendship of Alexander; that he would never interfere in his private
arrangements; that he entertained no personal hatred against the
Bourbons; and that, if he believed it were possible for them to accept
it, he would offer them an asylum in France, and any royal residence,
which might be agreeable to them. If you were then ignorant of these
instructions, you will, no doubt, find them among the papers of the
foreign office."

ARRIVAL OF THE FOREIGN COMMISSIONERS.—FORCED ETIQUETTE OF
  NAPOLEON.—ANECDOTES.—COUNCIL OF STATE; DETAILS RESPECTING THE
  PLACE OF MEETING, CUSTOMS, &C.—NOTICE OF SOME SITTINGS;
  DIGRESSION.—GASSENDI.—THE CROAT REGIMENT.—AMBASSADORS.—THE
  NATIONAL GUARD.—THE UNIVERSITY, &C.

17th of June.—The Emperor went out early in the morning. He ordered his
calash for the purpose of taking a ride before breakfast. When he was
stepping into it, we were informed, that the Newcastle man of war and
the Orontes frigate were tacking to enter the port. These two vessels
had overshot the island in the night, and were obliged to work to
windward. They sailed from England on the 23rd of April and brought the
bill respecting the Emperor’s detention. The English legislature had
sanctioned by law the determination of ministers on that subject. The
Commissioners of Austria, France and Russia were on board these vessels.

In the course of the day, the Emperor, speaking of the forms and
costumes which he had established, and of the etiquette which he had
introduced, said, “I found it a very difficult thing to give myself up
to my own inclinations. I started into public notice from the multitude.
Necessity compelled me to observe a degree of state; to adopt a certain
system of solemnity; in a word, to establish an etiquette. I should
otherwise have been every day liable to be slapped upon the shoulder. In
France, we are naturally inclined to a misplaced familiarity, and I had
to guard myself particularly against those who had at once, without any
preparatory study, become men of education. We become courtiers very
easily; we are very obsequious in the outset, and addicted to flattery
and adulation: but unless it be repressed, a certain familiarity soon
takes place, which might with great facility be carried as far as
influence. It is well known that our kings were not exempt from this
inconvenience.” Here the Emperor alluded to a very characteristic
anecdote of the time of Louis XIV.—that of the courtier, of the number
of whose children that prince enquired at his levee. “Four, Sire,” was
the reply. The king, having occasion to speak to him two or three times
in public during the day, put precisely the same question to him, “Pray,
Sir, how many children have you?” The answer was uniformly the same;
“Four, Sire.” At length, as the King was at play in the evening, he
repeated the usual question. “How many children have you?”—“Six, Sire.”
“How the plague can that be?” said the king, “for if I recollect right,
you told me you had but four.”—“Really, Sire, I was afraid of fatiguing
you with the constant repetition of the same thing.”

"“Sire,” observed one of the company to the Emperor, "I can mention an
anecdote of a neighbouring country, worthy of that which we have just
heard, and which may enable us to compare the gratuitous insolence of an
absolute monarch’s courtier with the open resentment of a man, who has
nothing to fear from his constitutional sovereign.

"A person moving in the circles of high life in London, had to complain
of a great personage, by whom he had been very ill-used, and pledged
himself to his friends to have ostensible satisfaction. Having learnt
that the great personage was to honour a very brilliant party with his
presence, he attended himself at an early hour and placed himself near
the lady of the house. The great personage had paid his respects to the
lady, and, after the customary compliments, being about to join the rest
of the company, he had scarcely turned round, before the offended
person, leaning carelessly towards her, said, with a loud voice, “Who is
your fat friend?” The lady reddened, touched him with her elbow, and
whispered; "Hold your tongue, I beg, don’t you see it is the Prince?"
The gentleman replied, in a higher tone than before;—"How, the
Prince!—Well, upon my honour, he is grown as fat as a pig."

Every one is at liberty to decide upon the relative demerits of these
two insolent characters. Both are, no doubt, very blameable, and if
there be less coarseness in the conduct of our countryman, it must also
be allowed, that his impertinence is altogether without an object and
purely gratuitous.

During another part of the day, the Emperor conversed at great length on
the sittings of the Council of State. I had pointed out some, and of
others we had but a doubtful recollection; or they had altogether
slipped our memory. “Well,” said he, “in a short time, scarcely a trace
of them will be left behind.” Being unable to sleep that night, I
thought of these words, and endeavoured to recollect, as minutely as I
could, every thing I was acquainted with respecting the Council of
State;—the seat of its meetings, its usages, forms, &c.; and I do not
think I can better employ the leisure of our solitude at St. Helena,
than by giving an account of them here. I shall occasionally add what I
may recollect of the sittings at which I was present. There are persons
to whom these details will not be destitute of interest.

The hall of the Council of State, in the Tuileries, the place where the
sittings were usually held, was on the same side with, and of the entire
length of, the chapel. In the partition wall were several large doors,
which being thrown open on Sundays, formed passages to the chapel. It
was a fine oblong apartment. At one of its extremities, towards the
interior of the palace, was a large and beautiful door, by which the
Emperor entered, when, attended by his Court, he proceeded on Sunday to
hear mass. It was only opened the rest of the week for the Emperor, when
he went to his Council of State. The members of the Council entered only
by two small doors, contrived for that purpose in the opposite
extremity.

A row of tables, which occupied the whole length of the hall, on the
right and left, was arranged there only when the council assembled, and
the space left was sufficient to admit of seats within near the wall,
and of a free passage without. There sat the Councillors of State, in
their respective order of precedence; their places were, besides,
designated by portfolios, bearing their names, and containing their
papers. At the extremity of the hall, towards the grand entrance, and
across the two rows, were placed similar tables for the Masters of
Requests. The Auditors were seated on stools or chairs, behind the
Councillors of State.

At the upper extremity of the hall, opposite to the grand entrance, was
the Emperor’s place on an elevation of one or two steps. There was his
arm chair, and a small table covered with a piece of rich tapestry, and
furnished with all the necessary articles, with paper, pens, ink,
penknives, and which were also laid before the Members of the Council.

At the right of the Emperor, but below, and on a level with us, was the
Prince Arch-chancellor, with a separate small table; on his left, the
Prince Arch-treasurer, who attended very seldom; and finally, at the
left of the latter, M. Locre, who drew up the official account of the
proceedings.

When any princes of the family happened to be present, a similar table
was placed for them on the same line, and according to their respective
rank. If any of the ministers were present, and they were all at liberty
to attend whenever they pleased, they took their places at the side
tables, at the head of the councillors of state. The enclosed space was
vacant, and none ever passed through it, but the Emperor, or the Members
of the Council, when proceeding to take the oath of allegiance to him.

The ushers moved silently about the hall, for the service of the
members, even during the deliberations of the Council. The members left
their places whenever they pleased, to obtain from their colleagues any
particular documents of which they might be in want, or for any other
purpose.

The upper compartments of the hall displayed allegorical paintings,
relative to the functions of the Council of State, such as Justice,
Commerce, Industry, &c. and the ceiling was decorated with the beautiful
picture of the battle of Austerlitz, by Gros. Thus, under one of the
most glorious laurels with which he ennobled France, did Napoleon
preside over its internal administration.

It was in that place that for nearly eighteen months I enjoyed the
inestimable advantage, the unparalleled satisfaction, of attending twice
a week sittings so interesting by their special objects, and rendered
still more so by the constant presence of the Emperor, who seemed to be
the soul and life of the deliberations. It was there that I have seen
him protract the discussions from eleven in the morning until nine at
night, and display at the conclusion as much activity, copiousness, and
freshness of mind and understanding as he did in the beginning, while we
were ready to sink with weariness and fatigue.

While the court was at St. Cloud the council was held there, but when
the sitting was to take place at too early an hour, or it was likely to
last long, the Emperor adjourned the proceedings until the members could
take some refreshment, which was served up in the adjacent apartment, on
small tables most magnificently supplied, as if by enchantment. I may
truly say, that it would be impossible to give a just idea of the
fascinations we witnessed in every thing belonging to the Imperial
palaces.

The hour of the Council’s sitting was regularly noticed in our letters
of convocation, but the hour was generally eleven.

When a sufficient number of members was present, the
Arch-Chancellor[note previously in text Arch-chancellor p2], who was
always there the first, and who presided in the Emperor’s absence,
opened the sitting, and called the attention of the Council to what was
then called the _little order of the day_, and which solely embraced
simple matters of a local nature and of mere form.

About an hour later, in general, the beating of the drum in the interior
of the Palace announced the Emperor’s arrival. The grand entrance was
thrown open; his Majesty was announced; all the Council rose, and the
Emperor appeared, preceded by his Chamberlain and his Aide-de-Camp on
duty, who presented his chair, received his hat, and continued behind
him during the sitting, ready to receive and execute his orders.

The Arch-Chancellor then presented to the Emperor the _great order of
the day_, which contained the series of objects under deliberation. The
Emperor read them over, and pointed out in a distinct tone that which he
wished to have discussed. The Councillor of State, nominated for the
purpose, read his report, and the deliberations commenced.

Every member was at liberty to speak; if several rose at the same time,
the order of precedence was regulated by the Emperor. The members spoke
from their places sitting. No written speeches were allowed to be read;
it was requisite that they should be made extemporaneously. When the
Emperor thought the question, in which he usually took no inconsiderable
share himself, sufficiently discussed, he made a summary of the
arguments, which was always luminous, and frequently marked with novelty
and point, came to a conclusion, and put it to the vote.

I have already noticed the freedom enjoyed in these debates. The
animation of the speakers, increasing by degrees, became sometimes
excessive, and the discussion was often protracted beyond measure,
particularly when the Emperor, occupied probably with some other
subject, seemed, either from distraction or something else, to be
altogether ignorant of what was going on. He then commonly cast a vacant
look over the hall, cut pencils with his penknife, pricked the cover of
his table or the arm of his chair with the point of it, or employed his
pencil or pen in scrawling whimsical marks or sketches, which, after he
was gone, excited the covetous attention of the young members, who made
a kind of scramble for them; and it was curious to observe, when he
happened to have traced the name of some country or capital, the
hyperbolical inferences that were sought to be extracted from it.

Sometimes too, when the Emperor entered the Council, as soon as his
dinner was ended, and after having undergone great fatigue during the
morning, he would fold his arms upon the table, lay down his head and
fall asleep. The Arch-Chancellor proceeded with the deliberations, which
were continued without interruption, and the Emperor, on awaking,
immediately caught up the thread of the discussion, though the previous
subject might have been ended and another introduced. The Emperor often
asked for a glass of water and sugar; and a table in the adjoining room
was always laid out with refreshments for his use, without any
precautions being adopted as to the individuals who were permitted to
approach it.

The Emperor, it is well known, was in the habit of taking snuff almost
every minute: this was a sort of mania which seized him chiefly during
intervals of abstraction. His snuff-box was speedily emptied; but he
still continued to thrust his fingers into it, or to raise it to his
nose, particularly when he was himself speaking. Those Chamberlains, who
proved themselves most expert and assiduous in the discharge of their
duties, would frequently endeavour, unobserved by the Emperor, to take
away the empty box and substitute a full one in its stead; for there
existed a great competition of attention and courtesy among the
Chamberlains who were habitually employed in services about the
Emperor’s person; an honour which was very much envied. These persons
were, however, seldom changed, either because they intrigued to retain
their places, or because it was naturally most agreeable to the Emperor
to continue them in posts, with the duties of which they were
acquainted. It was the business of the Grand Marshal (Duroc) to make all
these arrangements. The following is an instance of the attentions paid
by the Emperor’s Chamberlains. One of them, having observed that the
Emperor on going to the theatre frequently forgot his opera-glass, of
which he made constant use, got one made exactly like it, so that the
first time he saw the Emperor without his glass, he presented his own to
him, and the difference was not observed. On his return from the
theatre, the Emperor was not a little surprised to find that he had two
glasses exactly alike. Next day, he inquired how the new opera-glass had
made its appearance, and the Chamberlain replied that it was one which
he kept in reserve in case it might be wanted.

The Emperor always shewed himself very sensible of these attentions,
which were innocent in themselves, and which were calculated to make an
impression on the feelings, when dictated only by love and respect; for
then the individual was not acting the part of a slavish courtier, but
that of an affectionate and devoted servant. Napoleon, on his part,
whatever may have been reported to the contrary in the saloons of Paris,
shewed sincere regard for the persons of his household. When he quitted
Paris for St. Cloud, Malmaison, or any other of his country residences,
he usually invited the individuals of his household to his private
evening parties; and thus was formed a pleasant family circle,
admittance to which was held to be a very high honour. When in the
country, he also admitted his Chamberlains to dine at his table. One
day, while at dinner at Trianon, being troubled with a severe cold in
his head, a complaint to which he was very subject, he found himself in
want of a handkerchief; the servants immediately ran to fetch one, but
meanwhile the Chamberlain on duty, who was a relation of Maria Louisa’s,
drew a clean one unfolded from his pocket, and wished to take the other
from the Emperor. “I thank you,” said Napoleon; “but I will never have
it said that I allowed M—— to touch a handkerchief which I had used;”
and he threw it on the ground.

Such was the man who in certain circles was described as being coarse
and brutal, ill treating all his household, and even behaving rudely to
the ladies of the palace! The Emperor, on the contrary, was a scrupulous
observer of decorum. He was very sensible to all the little attentions
he received; and though it was a sort of system with him to suffer no
manifestation of gratitude to escape him, yet the expression of his eye
or the tone of his voice sufficiently denoted what he really felt.
Unlike those whose lips overflow with the expression of sentiments which
their hearts never feel, Napoleon seemed to make it a rule to repress or
disguise the kind emotions by which he was frequently inspired. I
believe I have already mentioned this fact; but the following are some
fresh proofs of it, which recur to me at this moment. These
circumstances are the more characteristic, since they occurred at
Longwood, where Napoleon might have been expected to indulge his natural
feelings with less restraint than during the possession of his power.

I usually sat beside my son, while he wrote from the Emperor’s
dictation. The Emperor always walked about the room when dictating, and
he frequently stood for a moment behind my chair, to look over the
writing, so that he might know where to take up the thread of his
dictation. When in this situation, how many times has my head been
enclosed between his arms, and even slightly pressed to his bosom! Then,
immediately checking himself, he seemed to have been merely leaning with
his elbows upon my shoulders, or playfully bearing all his weight upon
me, as if to try my strength.

The Emperor was very fond of my son, and I have often seen him bestow a
sort of manual caress on him; and then, as it were, to do away with the
effect of this motion, he would immediately accompany it by some words
uttered in a loud and somewhat sharp tone of voice. One day, as he was
entering the drawing-room, in a moment of good-humour and forgetfulness,
I saw him take Madame Bertrand’s hand and affectionately raise it to his
lips; but, suddenly recollecting himself, he turned away, in a manner
that would have had a very awkward effect, had not Madame Bertrand, with
that exquisite grace for which she is so peculiarly distinguished,
removed all embarrassment, by impressing a kiss on the hand that had
been extended to her. But these stories have carried me very far from my
subject. I must return to the Council of State.

All the reports, plans of resolutions, and decrees, which we had to
discuss, were printed and distributed to us at our own houses. There was
one subject, for example, relating to the University, which was perhaps
twenty times drawn up. Others lingered for a length of time in the
portfolios, or were at length totally dropped, without any cause being
assigned.

On my return from my mission to Holland, just after I had been created a
member of the Council of State, I rose to speak on the subject of the
Conscription. I was naturally interested in all that related to naval
affairs; my mind was full of enthusiasm, and was stored with the
observations which I had just collected in Holland. I proposed that all
the Dutch conscripts, in consideration of their natural predilections,
should be permitted, if they chose, to enter the naval service; and
moreover, that the privilege of this choice should be extended to all
the French conscripts. I pointed out the inconveniences which such an
arrangement was calculated to obviate, and developed the advantages
which it was likely to ensure. I observed that it was impossible to
render our seamen too numerous. Our ships’ crews, I said, would thus
become regiments: the same men would at once be sailors and soldiers,
gunners and pontooners; we should obtain double service at the same rate
of pay. My speech had, up to this point, been as favourably received as
I could wish: and in my own mind I congratulated myself on my success;
when on a sudden I lost all power of utterance. The train of my ideas
immediately became disconnected, and I stood mute and confounded,
without knowing where I was or what I was doing. This was the first time
I had ventured to speak; and I had made an extraordinary effort to
surmount my natural diffidence. Profound silence reigned in the
assembly, a hundred eyes were fixed upon me, and I was ready to sink
under the weight of my embarrassment. I had no alternative but to
confess my painful situation, to tell the Emperor, frankly, that I would
rather be in a battle; and finally to ask permission to conclude my
address by reading a few lines from a written paper which I had brought
with me. From that moment, however, I never felt any wish to speak in
the Council of State; I was completely cured of all desire to exert my
eloquence in future. But, in spite of this unfortunate circumstance, my
brief address had attracted the notice of the Emperor; for, a few days
afterwards, the Aid-de-Camp on duty (Count Bertrand), informed me that
the Emperor, while playing at billiards, seeing the Minister of the
Marine enter, said to him:—"Well, Sir, Las Cases read to us, at the
Council, a very good memorial on the composition of the navy; he was not
at all of your opinion respecting the age at which seamen should be
allowed to enter the service."

Every sitting of the Council, at which the Emperor presided, presented
the highest degree of interest, for he never failed to deliver a speech
himself, and all the observations that fell from him were important. I
was always delighted with his speeches: but a circumstance that both
surprised and vexed me was to hear some of the remarks which had fallen
from the Emperor in the course of the day at the Council of State,
repeated and often ill-naturedly perverted in the saloons of Paris in
the evening. How could this happen? Was it owing to the inaccuracy of
the individual who had reported what he heard, or to the malignity of
him to whom it had been reported? Be this as it may, the fact was as I
have stated.

I often entertained the idea of writing out the speeches which I had
heard the Emperor deliver, and I now very deeply regret having neglected
to do so. The following are a few reminiscences which occur to me at
this moment:

One day, the Emperor, speaking on the political rights which it was
proper to concede to persons of French origin born in foreign countries,
said, “The noblest title in the world is that of being born a Frenchman;
it is a title conferred by Heaven, and which no individual on earth
should have the power to withdraw. For my part, I wish that every man of
French origin, though he were a foreigner in the tenth generation,
should still be a Frenchman, if he wishes to claim the title. Were he to
present himself on the other bank of the Rhine, saying, I wish to be a
Frenchman, I would have his voice to be more powerful than the law; the
barriers should fall before him, and he should return triumphant to the
bosom of our common mother.”

On another occasion, he said, though I do not now recollect on what
subject he was speaking: “The Constituent Assembly acted very unwisely
in abolishing purely titular nobility; a measure which was calculated to
humble so many individuals. I do better. I confer on all Frenchmen
titles, of which every one has reason to be proud.”

At another time, he used the following words, which perhaps, I have
already quoted:—"I wish to raise the glory of the French name to such a
pitch as to make it the envy of all nations. I will, with God’s help,
bring it to pass, that in whatever part of Europe a Frenchman may
travel, he shall always find himself at home."

In the Council of State a discussion once arose respecting the plan of a
decree. The result of this discussion has now escaped my recollection,
but I know the subject was to determine that the kings of the Imperial
Families, occupying foreign thrones, should leave their titles and all
the etiquette of royalty on the frontier, and only resume them on
quitting France. The Emperor replying to some one who had started
objections to this, and at the same time explaining the motives for the
measure, said: “But for these monarchs I reserve in France a still
higher title; they shall be more than kings: they shall be French
Princes.”

I might multiply quotations of this kind to an endless length: they must
be engraven in the recollection of all the members of the Council, as
well as in mine. It will perhaps be a matter of surprise that, having
seen the Emperor so frequently, and having heard him deliver sentiments
such as these, I should have said, I did not know him at the period when
I followed him to St. Helena. My answer is that at that time I felt,
with regard to the Emperor, more of admiration and enthusiasm than of
real love, arising from an intimate knowledge of his character. Even in
the palace, we were assailed by so many absurd reports respecting the
private character and conduct of Napoleon, and we had so little direct
communication with him, that, by dint of hearing the same stories
repeated over and over, I imbibed, in spite of myself, a certain degree
of doubt and distrust. He was described to be of a dissembling and
cunning disposition, and it was affirmed that he could, when in public,
make a parade of fine sentiment, which he was totally incapable of
feeling; in short, that he possessed an eloquent tongue and an
insensible heart. Thus it was not until I became thoroughly acquainted
with his character that I was convinced how really and truly he was what
he appeared to be. Never perhaps was any man in the world so devotedly
attached to France, and there was no sacrifice which he would not
readily have made to preserve her glory. This is sufficiently evident
from his conduct at Chatillon, and after his return from Waterloo. He
expressed himself truly and energetically on his rock, when he used
these remarkable words, which I have before quoted: “No, my real
sufferings are not here!”

The following anecdotes have reference to other subjects, partly grave
and partly humourous. One day the Councillor of State, General Gassendi,
taking part in the discussion of the moment, dwelt much upon the
doctrines of economists. The Emperor, who was much attached to his old
artillery comrade, stopped him, saying: “My dear General, where did you
gain all this knowledge? Where did you imbibe these principles?”
Gassendi, who very seldom spoke in the Council, after defending himself
in the best way he could, finding himself driven into his last
entrenchments, replied that he had, after all, borrowed his opinions
from Napoleon himself. “How?” exclaimed the Emperor, with warmth, “What
do you say? Is it possible? From me, who have always thought that if
there existed a monarchy of granite, the chimeras of political
economists would reduce it to powder!” And after some other remarks,
partly ironical and partly serious, he concluded;—"Go, General! you must
have fallen asleep in your office, and have dreamed all this." Gassendi,
who was rather irascible, replied, “Oh! as for falling asleep in our
offices, Sire, I defy any one to do that with you, you plague us too
much for that.” All the Council burst into a fit of laughter, and the
Emperor laughed louder than any one.

Another time a question arose respecting the organization of the
Illyrian provinces, just after they had fallen into the power of France.
Those provinces, bordering on Turkey, were occupied by regiments of
Croatian troops, organized on a peculiar plan. They were, in short,
military colonies, the idea of which was conceived upwards of a century
ago by the great Prince Eugene, for the purpose of establishing a
barrier against the incursions and ravages of the Turks, and had well
fulfilled the purpose for which they were destined. The committee
appointed to draw up a plan for the organization of the Provinces,
proposed that the Croatian regiments should be disbanded, and replaced
by a national guard similar to ours. “Are you mad?” exclaimed the
Emperor, on hearing the report read; “are the Croatians Frenchmen? or
have you understood the excellence, utility, and importance of the
institution?”—"Sire," replied the person, who conceived himself bound to
defend the report, “the Turks will not now venture to resume their
transgressions.”—"And why not?"—"Sire, because your majesty is become
their neighbour."—"Well, and what of that?"—"Sire, they will be too much
awed by your power."—"Oh yes, Sire, Sire," replied the Emperor sharply,
“a truce to compliments at present, or, if you like, go and present them
to the Turks, who will answer you by a discharge of musquetry, and you
can return and give me an account of the affair.” The Emperor
immediately decided that the Croatian regiments should be preserved.

One day, the plan of a decree respecting ambassadors was submitted to
the consideration of the Council of State. This plan, though very
remarkable, was, I believe, never published to the world. The coolness
which the Council evinced on this subject caused the matter to be
dropped; many other plans also experienced the same fate; which, it may
be observed, affords an additional proof of the independence of the
Council, and shews that Napoleon possessed more moderation than is
generally believed.

The Emperor, who appeared to be the only individual to support the
decree, and who adhered to it very firmly, made some very curious
remarks in its defence. He wished that ambassadors should enjoy no
prerogatives or privileges which might place them above the laws of the
country. At most, he was only willing to grant that they should be
subject to a higher kind of jurisdiction. “For example,” said he, "I
have no objection that they should be brought to trial only after a
preliminary decision of an assemblage of the ministers and high
dignitaries of the empire; that they should be tried only by a special
tribunal, composed of the first magistrates and functionaries of the
state. It will perhaps be said that sovereigns, finding their own
dignity compromised in the persons of their representatives, will not
send ambassadors to my Court. Well, where will be the harm of that? I
can withdraw mine from foreign Courts, and thus the country will be
relieved from the burden of enormous and very frequently useless
salaries. Why should ambassadors be exempt from the law? They are sent
with the view of being agreeable, and for the purpose of maintaining an
interchange of friendship and favour between their respective
sovereigns. If they overstep the limits of their duty they should be
reduced to the class of common offenders, and placed within the pale of
the general law. I cannot tacitly permit ambassadors at my Court to act
the part of hired spies: if I do, I must be content to be regarded as a
fool, and to submit to all the mischief to which I may be exposed. It is
only necessary to have the matter well understood before-hand, so as to
obviate the impropriety of violating received customs, and what has
hitherto been regarded as the law of nations.

“During the height of a celebrated crisis,” continued the Emperor, “I
received information that a great personage had taken refuge in the
house of M. de Cobentzel, conceiving that he should be protected under
the immunities of the Austrian ambassador. I summoned the ambassador to
my presence, in order to enquire into the truth of the fact, and to
inform him that it would be most unfortunate if it were really such as
it had been reported to me. I observed that custom would be nothing in
my eyes when compared with the safety of a nation; and that I would
without hesitation order the arrest of the criminal and his privileged
protector, deliver them both up to a tribunal, and subject them to the
full penalties of the law. And this I would have done, gentlemen,” added
he, raising his voice. “The ambassador was aware of my determination,
and therefore my wishes were obeyed without further opposition.”

Long before the expedition to Russia, perhaps a year or two before it
was undertaken, the Emperor wished to establish a military
classification of the Empire. At the Council of State, there were read
fifteen or twenty plans for the organization of the three classes of the
French national guard. The first, which was to consist of young men, was
to march as far as the frontiers; the second, which was to be composed
of middle-aged and married men, was not to quit the department to which
it belonged; and the third, consisting of men in years, was to be kept
solely for the defence of the town in which it had been raised. The
Emperor, who was well convinced of the utility of this plan, frequently
recurred to it, and made many patriotic remarks on the subject; but it
constantly received marked disapproval from the Council, and experienced
a kind of passive and silent opposition. Meanwhile, amidst the multitude
of public affairs which claimed the attention of the Emperor, he lost
sight of this plan, which his foresight had doubtless calculated for the
safety of France, and which was likely to have ensured that result.
Upwards of two millions of men would have been classed and armed at the
period of our disasters. Who then would have ventured to assail us?

During a discussion on the above subject, the Emperor spoke in a very
emphatic and remarkable strain. A member (M. Malouet), in a very
circumlocutory style, expressed his disapproval of this plan of
organization. The Emperor addressing him in his usual way, said: “Speak
boldly, sir, do not mutilate your ideas: say what you have to say,
freely; we are here by ourselves.” The speaker then declared “that the
measure was calculated to excite general alarm; that every one trembled
to find himself classed in the national guard, being persuaded that,
under the pretext of internal defence, the object was to remove the
guard from the country.” “Very good!” said the Emperor, “I now
understand you. But, gentlemen,” continued he, addressing himself to the
members of the Council, "you are all fathers of families, possessing
ample fortunes, and filling important posts, you must necessarily have
numerous dependents; and you must either be very awkward, or very
indifferent, if, with all these advantages, you do not exercise a great
influence on public opinion. Now, how happens it that you, who know me
so well, should suffer me to be so little known by others? When did you
ever know me to employ deception and fraud in my system of government? I
am not timid, and I therefore am not accustomed to resort to indirect
measures. My fault is, perhaps, to express myself too abruptly, too
laconically. I merely pronounce the word, I order, and, with regard to
forms and details, I trust to the intermediate agent who executes my
intentions; and heaven knows, whether, on this point, I have any great
reason to congratulate myself. If, therefore, I wanted troops, I should
boldly demand them of the Senate, who would levy them for me; or if I
could not obtain them from the Senate, I should address myself to the
people, and you would see them eagerly march to join my ranks. Perhaps
you are astonished to hear me say this, for sometimes you appear not to
have a correct idea of the real state of things. Know, then, that, my
popularity is immense, and incalculable; for, whatever may be alleged to
the contrary, the whole of the French people love and respect me: their
good sense is superior to the malignant reports of my enemies and the
metaphysical speculations of fools. They would follow me in defiance of
all. You are surprised at these declarations, but they are nevertheless
true. The French people know no benefactor but me. Through me they
fearlessly enjoy all that they have acquired; through me they behold
their brothers and sons indiscriminately promoted, honoured, and
enriched; through me they find their hands constantly employed, and
their labour accompanied by its due reward. They have never had reason
to accuse me of injustice or prepossession. Now, the people see, feel
and comprehend all this; but they understand nothing of metaphysics. Not
that I am inclined to repel true and great principles; heaven forbid
that I should. On the contrary, I act upon them as much as our present
extraordinary circumstances will permit; but I only mean to say, that
the people do not yet understand them; while they perfectly understand
me, and place implicit trust in me. Be assured, then, that the people of
France will always conform to the plans which we propose for their
welfare.

“Do not allow yourselves to be deceived by the supposed opposition which
has just been alluded to; it exists only in the saloons of Paris, and by
no means in the great body of the nation. In this plan, I solemnly
declare I have no ulterior view of sending the national guard abroad; my
thoughts, at this moment, are solely occupied in adopting measures at
home, for the safety, repose, and stability of France. Proceed then to
organize the national guard; that each citizen may know his post in the
hour of need; that even M. Cambaceres, yonder, may shoulder a musket,
should our danger require him so to do. We shall thus have a nation
built of stone and mortar, capable of resisting the attacks both of time
and men. I will moreover raise the national guard to a level with the
regiments of the line: the old retired officers shall be the chiefs and
the fathers of the corps. I shall have promotion in the national guard
solicited as ardently as Court favours.”

All this must be contained in the registers of M. Locré, partly in
discussions relative to the national guard, and partly, as well as I can
recollect, on the subject of one of the annual conscriptions. I remember
that one day, in particular, there was a long debate respecting the
University. The Emperor had expressed himself dissatisfied with the
little advancement that was observable in the institution, and the bad
system on which it was conducted. M. Segur was directed to present a
report on this subject, which he did with his usual candour and
sincerity. He set on foot the necessary inquiries, and found that the
Emperor’s plans were ill understood and badly executed. Napoleon had
wished that erudition should be only a secondary object, that national
principles and doctrines should take place of every thing; and yet these
principles and doctrines were the subjects to which least attention was
paid.

The Emperor was not present at this sitting—a circumstance which very
much mortified the friends of the person principally interested in the
question. We were guilty of sacrificing too much to the spirit of
_coteries_. The report was never again brought forward; it was withdrawn
from our portfolios, and it was made a point of some importance to get
it returned from those members of the Council who had carried it home
with them.

However, some time after this, the great dignitaries of the University
were summoned to the bar of the Council of State. The Emperor expressed
his displeasure at the bad management and the bad spirit which seemed to
preside over this important institution. He observed that all his
intentions were frustrated, that his plans were never properly carried
into effect, &c. M. de F—— bent before the storm, and nevertheless
pursued his accustomed course. The Emperor said, on his return from the
Island of Elba, that he had been assured that the Grand Master of the
University had made a boast to the government, which succeeded the
Empire, of having done all in his power to thwart and misdirect the
impulse which Napoleon wished to impart to the rising generation.

                       RECOLLECTIONS OF WATERLOO.

18th.—The Emperor sent for me to his study before dinner; he was busy in
reading the newspapers which had just arrived. M. de Montholon solicited
permission to wait on him. He informed the Emperor that Madame de
Montholon had just been delivered of a daughter, and requested his
Majesty to do him the honour to stand godfather to the child.

After dinner, the Emperor again looked over the papers which he had
already perused, and remarked that France still remained in a state of
agitation and uncertainty: he observed that the latest English papers
used the most indecorous language with regard to the royal family....
One article led him to say: “Present circumstances, the necessities of
the moment, and sympathies of old date, concur in favouring the return
of the monks to France. This is a characteristic circumstance in France,
as in the territories of the Pope.” Then, dwelling on the subject of the
latter, he continued, “as for the Pope, it is his special affair, and is
calculated to restore his power. Would any one believe that, while he
was himself a prisoner at Fontainebleau, and while the question of his
own existence was under consideration, he argued with me seriously on
the existence of the monks, and endeavoured to induce me to re-establish
them! That was truly like the Court of Rome!”

This day was the anniversary of the battle of Waterloo. The
circumstance was mentioned by some one present, and the recollection
of it produced a visible impression on the Emperor. “Incomprehensible
day!” said he in a tone of sorrow—"Concurrence of unheard of
fatalities!—Grouchy!—Ney!—D’Erlon!—Was there treachery, or only
misfortune!—Alas! poor France!—" Here he covered his eyes with his
hands. “And yet,” said he, “all that human skill could do was
accomplished! All was not lost until the moment when all had
succeeded!”

A short time afterwards, alluding to the same subject, he exclaimed; "in
that extraordinary campaign, thrice, in less than a week’s space, I saw
the certain triumph of France, and the decision of her fate slip through
my fingers.

“But for the desertion of a traitor, I should have annihilated the enemy
at the opening of the campaign. I should have destroyed him at Ligny, if
my left had done its duty.—I should have destroyed him again at
Waterloo, if my right had not failed me. Singular defeat, by which,
notwithstanding the most fatal catastrophe, the glory of the conquered
has not suffered, nor the fame of the conqueror been encreased: the
memory of the one will survive his destruction; the memory of the other
will perhaps be buried in his triumph!”

DEPARTURE OF THE NORTHUMBERLAND.—ON THE INTRODUCTION AND FORM GIVEN TO
  THE CAMPAIGNS OF ITALY.—THE RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN, BY AN AIDE-DE-CAMP OF
  THE VICEROY’S.

19th.—To-day the Northumberland sailed for Europe.

This vessel had conveyed us to St. Helena; we had in the course of our
voyage maintained a friendly intercourse with the officers; the crew had
shewn us great kindness, and we had received attentions from Admiral
Cockburn himself, towards whom we entertained more of ill-humour than
absolute dislike, and whose conduct, after all, had not been of a nature
to wound our feelings. Whether from all these circumstances combined, or
some others which had escaped our notice, or whether owing to that
powerful and natural inclination which leads us to attach ourselves to
our fellow creatures, and to cherish social feelings with regard to each
other, I know not; but it is certain that we did not feel indifferent to
the departure of the Northumberland. It seemed as though we had lost
something in thus bidding adieu to our old shipmates.

The Emperor had passed a very bad night; he bathed his feet to relieve a
violent head-ache.

About one o’clock he went to take a walk in the garden, having in his
hand the first volume of an English work, respecting his own life. He
turned it over as he walked about. This work had evidently been written
in a less malignant spirit than Goldsmith’s. It certainly exhibited less
grossness; but it contained the same inventions, the same false
statements, and displayed the same ignorance. The Emperor read the
article relative to his childhood, and that period of his early life
which he spent at College. The whole was a tissue of misrepresentation;
and this led him to remark that I had been very right in suggesting that
a narrative of the events of his early career should be prefixed to the
campaign of Italy; and he added that what he had just read had fully
confirmed him in favour of this idea.

I ought before to have mentioned that, after the dictation of the
campaigns of Italy was concluded, and after it had all been arranged in
chapters, the Emperor was still undecided as to the manner in which he
should form an introduction to it. He had changed his mind frequently on
this subject, and had conceived many different ideas, which he by turns
abandoned and resumed. Sometimes he was inclined to commence with a few
unimportant enterprises in which he had been engaged before the siege of
Toulon; such as an expedition to Sardinia, which had failed, &c. At
other times he determined to open the subject by describing the first
events of the French revolution, the state of Europe and the movements
of our armies. I always disapproved these ideas, which, I conceived,
would carry him back to too remote a period. He had begun by dictating
to me the siege of Toulon, and this I maintained to be the proper point
of departure, and the most natural arrangement, since he had not
undertaken to write a history, but only his private Memoirs. In this
grand episode of the history of ages, he ought, I said, to appear all at
once on the theatre of the world, and to occupy the fore-ground which he
was destined never afterwards to quit. It was my place, as editor, to
record, in any introduction which I might think proper to make, all the
details of Napoleon’s early life, and of the events anterior to the
period to which his own dictations referred. The Emperor approved this
idea; and after discussing it one day at dinner, he decided on its
adoption. The form that has been given to the campaigns of Italy was
determined on by the above considerations, and to this subject the
Emperor alluded in his remark just mentioned, respecting the
introduction to the campaigns.

At three o’clock, the governor and the new admiral, Sir Pulteney
Malcolm, were presented to the Emperor, who, though labouring under
indisposition, was nevertheless very gracious and talkative.

Both before and after dinner, the Emperor amused himself by looking over
a work on the Russian campaign, written by an officer who had formerly
been one of the Viceroy’s aides-de-camp. The Emperor had heard it
described as a most odious production; but he has been so accustomed to
the attacks of libellers that declamation has but little effect upon
him. In works of this kind he looks to facts only; and under this point
of view he did not find the publication in question so bad as it had
been represented to him. “An historian,” said he, “would select from it
only what is good; he would take the facts and omit the declamation,
which is only calculated to please fools. The author of this work proves
that the Russians themselves burnt Moscow, Smolensko, &c.; he describes
the French as having been victorious in every engagement. The facts that
are to be found in this work,” continued the Emperor, "have evidently
been described for the purpose of being published during my reign, in
the period of my power. The declamatory passages have been interpolated
since my fall. The author could not easily pervert the ground-work of
his subject, though he has interspersed it with abusive remarks after
the fashion of the day.

“As to the disasters of my retreat, I left him nothing to say any more
than other libellers. My 29th bulletin plunged them into despair. In
their rage they accused me of exaggeration. They were provoked to a
pitch of madness. I thus deprived them of an excellent subject, I
carried off their prey.”

The Emperor quoted several passages from the works of this and some
other French authors, all of whom declaimed against their countrymen,
and gave a false picture of their achievements. He could not refrain
from observing that it was a circumstance unexampled in history to see a
nation strive to depreciate her own glory, to see her own sons thus
intent on destroying her trophies. “But from the bosom of France
avengers will doubtless arise. Posterity will brand with disgrace the
madness of the present day. Can these be Frenchmen,” he exclaimed, “who
speak and write in this strain? Are their hearts dead to every spark of
patriotism?—But no, they cannot be Frenchmen! They speak our language,
it is true; they were born on the same soil with us; but they are not
animated by the feelings and principles of Frenchmen!”

PROPHETIC REMARKS.—LORD HOLLAND.—THE PRINCESS CHARLOTTE OF
  WALES.—CONVERSATION RELATING TO MYSELF.

21st.—The Emperor took a walk in the garden attended by his suite. The
conversation turned on the possibility of our returning to Europe and
seeing France once more. “My dear friends,” said he, in a tone of
sincere feeling, and with an expression which it is impossible to
describe, “you will return!”—"Not without you," we all exclaimed with
one voice. This led us once more to analyze the probable chances of our
quitting St. Helena, and all yielded to the necessity of admitting that
our removal could only take place through the intervention of the
English. But the Emperor could not imagine how this intervention was
likely to be brought about. “The impression is made,” said he; “it has
taken too deep a root; they will everlastingly fear me. Pitt told them,
There can be no safety for you, with a man who has a whole invasion in
his single head.” “But,” observed some one present, “suppose new
interests should arise in England; suppose a truly constitutional and
liberal ministry should be established, would the English government
find no advantage in fixing through you, Sire, liberal principles in
France, and thereby propagating them throughout Europe?” “Certainly,”
replied the Emperor, “I admit all this.” “Well then,” continued the
individual who had first spoken, “would not this constitutional
administration find a guarantee in these liberal principles and in your
own interests?” “I admit this also,” replied the Emperor. "I can suppose
Lord Holland, as Prime Minister of England, writing to me at Paris: If
you do so and so I shall be ruined; or the Princess Charlotte of Wales,
whom we will suppose to have removed me hence, saying to me: If you act
thus, I shall be hated and shall be looked upon as the scourge of my
country. At these words I should stop short:—they would arrest me in my
career more effectually than armies.

“And after all, what is there to fear? That I should wage war? I am now
too old for that. Is it feared that I should resume my pursuit of glory?
I have enjoyed glory even to satiety. I have wallowed in it; and it may
be said to be a thing which I have henceforth rendered at once common
and difficult. Is it supposed that I would recommence my conquests? I
did not persevere in them through mania; they were the result of a great
plan, and I may even say that I was urged to them by necessity. They
were reasonable at the moment when I pursued them; but they would now be
impossible. They were practicable once; but now it would be madness to
attempt them. And besides, the convulsions and misfortunes to which
France has been subjected will henceforth produce so many difficulties,
that to remove them will be a sufficient source of glory without seeking
for any other.”

Two of the gentlemen of the Emperor’s suite had been to the town to see
the persons who had newly arrived at the Island, and to hear the news of
the day. The account which they delivered on their return occupied the
Emperor’s attention for some minutes in the garden. About six o’clock he
proceeded to his closet, desiring me to follow him; and by chance a
conversation was introduced, which to me was in the highest degree
interesting and valuable. Though the subject of this conversation
relates to myself personally, yet I cannot pass it over in silence; it
develops so many characteristic traits of the Emperor, that these would
furnish a sufficient apology for my laying it before the reader, were
any apology necessary.

The persons who had arrived by the Newcastle had spoken much of my
Historical Atlas, which led the Emperor again to remark on the
extraordinary celebrity of the work, and to express his surprise that he
should not sooner have become thoroughly acquainted with it.

“How happened it,” said he, “that none of your friends should have given
me a correct idea of it? I never saw it until I was on board the
Northumberland, and now I find it is known to every body. How came you
never to call my attention to it yourself? I should have appreciated
your merits, and should have made your fortune. I had formed a confused
and indifferent idea of your work, which perhaps influenced my mind
unfavourably with respect to yourself. Such is the misfortune of
Sovereigns; for doubtless no one entertained better intentions than
myself. Those who filled posts about my person might easily have brought
me to render full justice to the merit of your work; for it was a thing
that I could myself judge of, and I asked nothing more. Since I have
become acquainted with your tables, and am enabled to form a correct
notion of their valuable classification, and the indelible impression
which they are calculated to make on the memory, with regard to dates,
places, and collateral relations, I regret not having established a kind
of Normal School, in which the students should have been uniformly
instructed by the help of the Historical Atlas. Our Lyceums would have
been inundated with your work, or parts of it, and I would have ensured
to it the utmost degree of celebrity. Why, I say again, did you not call
my attention to it? It is painful to confess the secret; but it is
nevertheless true, that a little intrigue is indispensable to those who
wish to gain the favour of Sovereigns; modest merit is almost always
neglected. But, perhaps, after all, Clarke, Decrès, Montalivet, M. de
Montesquiou, or even Barbier, my librarian, might have withheld the
hints which you intended they should throw out to me; for it is another
mortifying truth, that favours are sometimes more attainable through the
medium of the _valet-de-chambre_ than by a higher channel! And how
happened it, that your friend Madame de S.... did not speak to me of
your work? We frequently rode in the same carriage together; and she
might have secured to you all the advantages she could have wished, by
describing your real merits to me.”—"Yes, Sire," I replied, “but at that
time I....” “I understand you. You did not then perhaps seek favours?”
“Sire, my hour had not yet arrived.” Then ensued a very long explanation
respecting my first introduction to the Emperor, the missions to which
he had appointed me, the opinion which he had formed of me, and which,
according to custom, had remained permanently fixed in his mind.

All this time I was standing near the writing-table in the second
chamber, while the Emperor walked backward and forward through the whole
length of both rooms. The subject of the conversation was to me most
interesting. But, to form a just conception of my feelings at this
moment, it would be necessary to look back to the time of Napoleon’s
power, to that period when no one dared hope to know his thoughts, or
ever to suppose the possibility of conversing familiarly and
confidentially with him. Such a happy circumstance would then have
appeared to me a dream: and now I almost regard it as a conversation in
the Elysian Fields.

“I had no correct idea of you,” said the Emperor, "I had no precise
knowledge of anything that concerned you. You had no friend near me to
commend you to my notice, and you neglected to put yourself forward.
Some of those persons on whom perhaps you thought you could rely even
acted in a way prejudicial to your interest. I knew nothing of your
work; if I had, it would have been a powerful circumstance in your
favour. I was not aware that you had, like myself, attended the military
school at Paris; that would have been another claim to my notice.

“You had been an emigrant, you would therefore never have enjoyed my
full confidence. I knew that you had been much attached to the Bourbons;
you would therefore never have been initiated in the great secrets of my
government.”—"But Sire," I replied, “your Majesty permitted me to
approach your person, you made me a Councillor of State, and entrusted
me with various missions.”—"That was because I conceived you to be an
honest man; and besides, I am not of a distrustful disposition. Without
knowing why, I considered you to be a man of pure integrity in all that
regarded pecuniary matters. If you had only mentioned a single word to
me about your affair of the commercial licenses with P....[——?], I would
have instantly rendered you justice. But, I say again, I should never
have employed you in any political affair."—"Then, Sire," said I, “what
risk did I not run, when in Paris and Holland! The English were then
situated with respect to us, as we now are with respect to them, and,
influenced by my old connections, I ventured in spite of your
regulations to forward their letters, when they appeared to me to
contain nothing objectionable. To what danger should I not have been
exposed had my conduct led to any accusation on the part of the Minister
of Police! And yet I conceived that I was only making a very natural and
discretionary use of the powers with which Your Majesty had entrusted
me, and the confidence which you had reposed in me. I felt so satisfied
in my own conscience, and was so convinced of the propriety of my
intentions, that I thought myself exempt from the observance of
regulations which seemed not to have been made for me.”—"Well," observed
the Emperor, “I could have conceived all this, I should readily have
given you credit for such an explanation of your conduct; for no one is
more ready to listen to reason than I. This was precisely the manner in
which I wished duty to be performed; and yet it is certain that you
would have been condemned had your conduct been the subject of enquiry,
because all would have raised their voices against you. Such was the
fatality of circumstances and the misfortune of my situation. Besides,
when once I conceived a prejudice, I retained it: this again was the
misfortune of my situation and my circumstances. But how could it be
otherwise? I had no time for details. I could only take into
consideration summaries and abstracts. I was very sure that I might
sometimes be deceived; but where was my alternative? Few sovereigns have
done better than I.”

“Sire,” said I, “I experienced deep mortification, at finding that your
Majesty never addressed a word to me at your Court circles and levees.
And yet you never failed to speak of me to my wife when I happened to be
absent: I sometimes thought that I was not well known to you, or feared,
particularly during later times, that your Majesty had some cause to be
displeased with me.”—"By no means," resumed the Emperor; “if I spoke of
you when absent, it was because I made it a rule always to speak to
ladies about their husbands when the latter were sent on missions. If I
neglected you when present, it was because I attached too little value
to you. It was the same with many other individuals; you were confounded
with the mass, you held only an ordinary rank in my regard. You were
permitted to approach me, and yet you did not turn this privilege to
good account; you were sent on missions, and yet you neglected to reap
the benefit of these appointments on your return home. It is a great
fault to keep in the back-ground at court. To my eyes you were in fact a
mere blank. Nevertheless, I recollect that I sometimes entertained
thoughts of employing you. The person connected with the ministry, on
whom you in some measure depended, who declared himself to be your
friend, and who had it in his power to serve you, diverted my attention
from you, and contributed to keep up my indifference towards you. He
knew you well, and perhaps feared you; and it is well known that in all
cases I went rapidly to work.”—"Sire," I replied, “my situation was the
more painful, since my friends were constantly congratulating me on the
favours which I received at Court, and predicting the brilliant fortune
that awaited me. Reports were continually raised of my having been
appointed to all sorts of posts:—sometimes it was asserted that I had
been created Maritime Prefect of Brest, Toulon, or Antwerp; that I had
been made Minister of the Interior or of the Marine; or that I had
received an important trust connected with the education of the King of
Rome, &c.”—"Well," said the Emperor, “now that you call the matter to my
recollection, some of these reports were not entirely destitute of
foundation. I certainly did entertain the idea of employing you to
assist in the education of the King of Rome; and I also intended, on
your return to Holland, to appoint you to be Maritime Prefect of Toulon,
which at that time I regarded as a sort of ministry. There were
five-and-twenty ships of the line in the roads, and I wished to augment
their number. In this instance, your friend, the Minister, turned my
attention from you. You belonged to the old navy, he observed; your
prejudices and those of the new officers must inevitably clash together.
This appeared to me a decided objection to your appointment, and I
thought no more about you; but now, since I have come to know you, I
find that you were precisely the man I wanted. I think, too, that I
entertained some other ideas respecting your advancement; but I must
again repeat that you neglected your own interests. You retreated when
you ought to have advanced. Need I tell you that, with the best
intentions on my part, the chance against procuring an appointment to an
important post was as great as that of winning a prize in the lottery.
An idea occurred to me, and I formed my decision; but if that decision
were not immediately carried into effect, it escaped my recollection;
for I had so much business on my hands. A luckier candidate was then
proposed, and he was installed in office.—But I interrupt you....”

“Sire,” continued I, "being ignorant of your Majesty’s kind intentions
respecting me, I was placed in a situation truly ridiculous, amidst the
numerous congratulations that I received. I endeavoured to extricate
myself from all this embarrassment with the best possible grace; but the
more efforts I made for this purpose, the more I was blamed for my
modesty. I never asked your Majesty for more than one thing, and that
was the situation of Master of Requests, which was immediately granted
to me. Clarke reproached me with having lowered my dignity by making
such a solicitation. He said that I should have asked to be made a
Councillor of State; and that your Majesty would have granted my
request."—"No," replied the Emperor, “I did not know you well enough for
that. I should have looked upon such a request as the result of silly
ambition.”—" Sire," I observed, “I had sufficient tact to guess what
your opinion would be.”—"Well,“ continued the Emperor, that was odd
enough. But perhaps Clarke was right after all. The solicitation of the
inferior post of Master of Requests might have injured you in my
opinion; that is to say, it might have tended to fix you in the rank in
which I had classed you. I was very well pleased to see my chamberlains
have something to do; but Master of Requests was too trivial a post. It
is curious,” continued he, “how my memory revives, now that I am
speaking on this subject. You had performed detached services, which had
rapidly escaped my recollection, because my attention had never been
directed to them. If they had been presented to my notice all in a mass,
they must have given me a very different opinion of you. You served as a
volunteer at Flushing. I knew this; and what I should have regarded as a
mere matter of course in any other individual, forcibly struck me in an
emigrant, who had for this purpose quitted his family, and who was not
without fortune.”—"Sire, I received the most gratifying reward on my
return. Your Majesty spoke to me on the subject."—"But," said he, “you
suffered this to be lost in the flood of oblivion. You addressed several
written communications to me. All these things occur to my recollection
by degrees. You transmitted to me some plans respecting the Adriatic
Sea, with which I was much pleased. The suggestion was to get possession
of the Adriatic, and to establish a fleet there. Ships could have been
built at no vast expense, with the wood produced in the immense forests
of Croatia. I submitted the whole to the Minister, who never more
mentioned the subject to me. But you presented some other things to my
notice.”—"Sire, you probably allude to the ideas respecting the system
of maritime warfare to be adopted against England, accompanied by an
explanatory map."—"Yes, I recollect. The map lay for several days on the
desk in my closet. I expressed a wish to see you; but you were absent on
a mission."

“Sire, about the same time I had the honour to address to you a plan for
transforming the Champ-de-Mars into a _Naumachia_, which would have been
an ornament to the palace of the King of Rome. I proposed that the basin
should be dug sufficiently deep to admit the launching of small
corvettes, which might have been built, rigged, manned and worked by the
pupils of the naval school, which, according to my plan, was to be
established at the military school. All the Princes of the Imperial
house might have been required to devote themselves to these naval
exercises for the space of two years, whatever might have been their
ultimate destination. Your Majesty might have induced the distinguished
families of the empire thus to procure for their sons a knowledge of
naval affairs. I doubted not that all these circumstances combined, and
the spectacle presented to the capital, would infallibly have rendered
the navy at once popular and national in France.”—"Ah! I was not aware
of the extent of your plan," said the Emperor, in whose mind every idea
immediately became magnified. “This design would have pleased me. It
might have produced immense results. From this plan there was but a step
to that of rendering the Seine navigable, and cutting a canal from Paris
to the sea. This could not have been regarded as too stupendous an
enterprise; for more was done by the Romans in ancient times, and more
has already been effected by the Chinese of the present day. It would
have afforded a pastime to the army in time of peace. I had conceived
many plans of the same kind. But our enemies kept me chained to war. Of
what glory have they robbed me!... But continue.”—

"Sire, I also submitted to your Majesty’s consideration some ideas
respecting the completion of the naval schools."—"Did I adopt them in
the schools which I established?" inquired the Emperor. “Did your
opinions coincide with mine?” “Sire, the plans for your schools were
already determined on; I merely suggested a few hints for their
completion.”—"Oh, now I recollect something of the matter. But I think
your ideas were a little too democratic; were they not?"—"No, Sire, I
set out from the principle that your Majesty had provided for the
exclusive competition of the intermediate class, and I proposed to add
below it all the chances that might be presented by the competition of
seamen; and above it, all the chances that might arise out of the
competition of individuals connected with the Court."—"Yes, I
recollect," said the Emperor, "your ideas were novel and singular, and
they attracted my attention. I submitted the plan to the Minister, who
either kept it for his own use, or turned it into ridicule. I also
remember that, in the correspondence relative to your mission to
Holland, which I ordered to be laid before me, there was mentioned a
plan for removing our ships from the German Ocean to the Baltic, by
means of canals, which should unite the Elbe, the Oder, and the Vistula.
This idea pleased me; it was after my own taste. And on your return,
seeing you at my levee, I was about to propose to you some measure for
the execution of your plan. But you did not seem to comprehend my
questions, or you gave me unsatisfactory and undecided answers. I
concluded that the ideas had probably been suggested by some one else,
and that you were taking credit for them. I therefore left you, and
turned to speak to your neighbour. I was to blame for acting thus
precipitately; but I could not help it.

"When I call to mind all these circumstances, I find that I had so many
motives for bestowing attention on you, that I am astonished I should
have neglected you: and I cannot help thinking that you must have
manœuvred admirably, before you could have succeeded in withdrawing
yourself so completely from my notice. It is very certain that all these
facts have but just now occurred to me: and at the period of our
departure, and some time afterwards, you were, with the exception of
your name and person, a stranger to me. I looked upon you as one of whom
I knew nothing. How do you account for this? You cannot perhaps explain
it; but it is nevertheless true.

“I ask again, why you did not avail yourself of the good offices of your
friends; or why you did not appeal to me in person?”—"Sire, those who
enjoyed the privilege of approaching nearest to your person were intent
only on advancing their own interests. Their friendship did not extend
beyond mere good wishes. To speak a word for another was what they
called using their influence; and that was reserved solely for their own
advantage. Besides, even though I had had the opportunity of speaking
for myself, I should always have preferred others to speak for me. You,
Sire, had but little leisure, your arrangements were very uncertain, it
was necessary to explain every thing to you in few words. At the same
time, I had so little confidence in myself, and was so fearful of
creating an unfavourable impression, that I preferred withdrawing myself
from your notice. For it was not sufficient to enter into intrigue; it
was necessary that the intrigue should be brought to a result."—"Perhaps
it was as well after all," said the Emperor. “You have judged the matter
rightly; for, even had I known as much of you as I now do, your reserve
and timidity would perhaps have ruined you. I now recollect a
circumstance, which probably operated to your prejudice. When M. de
Montesquiou proposed you as Chamberlain, he represented you as being
possessed of vast fortune; but I soon learned the contrary. I do not
mean to say that this circumstance was in any way injurious to you, or
that it afforded any ground of objection to you personally; but other
individuals, who wished to be appointed Chamberlains, complained of not
having been preferred on account of their superior fortune, or quoted
your example, if they thought themselves neglected on the score of their
poverty. This is the way at Court.”

“It appears evident, Sire, that, with my character, I was destined never
to be known to your Majesty.”—"Yes,“ said the Emperor and it had nearly
happened so. But yet, on my return, did I not appoint you a Chamberlain?
and their number was very limited. Did I not immediately create you a
Councillor of State? You had been a member of the old aristocracy, you
had been an emigrant, and you had undergone great trials; all these were
powerful recommendations to me. Besides, at that time, so many voices
were raised in praise of your conduct that, sooner or later, I must have
known you thoroughly.”

             ARRIVAL OF THE LIBRARY.—HORNEMANN’S TESTIMONY
                    IN FAVOUR OF GENERAL BONAPARTE.

22nd.—To-day the weather was very bad. The Emperor sent for me about
three o’clock. He was in the topographical cabinet, surrounded by all
the persons of his suite, who were engaged in unpacking some boxes of
books which had arrived by the Newcastle. The Emperor himself helped to
unpack, and seemed to be highly amused with the occupation. Men
naturally adapt themselves to their circumstances: their enjoyments are
trivial in proportion as their sufferings are severe. On seeing the file
of Moniteurs, which had been so long expected, he expressed unfeigned
delight: he took it up and began eagerly to peruse it.

After dinner the Emperor looked over Park’s and Hornemann’s Travels in
Africa, and he traced their course on my Atlas. In these narratives,
Hornemann, and the African Society of London, bore ample testimony to
the generous assistance they had received from the General-in-chief of
the army of Egypt (Napoleon), who had seized every opportunity of
promoting their discoveries. The polite and handsome manner in which
these facts were mentioned was very gratifying to the Emperor, who had
been long accustomed to find his name connected with insulting epithets.

              ON MEMORY.—TRADE.—NAPOLEON’S IDEAS AND PLANS
                ON SEVERAL POINTS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY.

23rd.—I attended the Emperor about three o’clock. He had been so
delighted at the receipt of his new books that he had passed the whole
night in reading and dictating notes to Marchand. He was very much
fatigued; but my visit afforded him a little respite. He dressed and
went out to walk in the garden.

During dinner the Emperor alluded to his immense reading in his youth;
and he found, from all the books he had perused relative to Egypt, that
he had scarcely any thing to correct in what he had dictated on Egypt:
he had stated many facts which he had not read, but which, on reference
to these books, he found to be correct.

The conversation turned on the subject of memory. The Emperor remarked
that a head without memory was like a garrison without fortifications.
His he said was a useful kind of memory. It was not general and
absolute; but relative, faithful, and only retentive of what was
necessary. Some one present observed that his own memory was like his
sight, that it became confused by the distance of places and objects, as
he removed from one situation to another; upon which the Emperor replied
that, for his part, his memory was like his heart, that it preserved a
faithful impression of all that ever had been dear to him.

A-propos of good memory and fond recollections, I must here note down a
remark of the Emperor’s, which I omitted to mention at the time it was
made. One day at dinner, while describing one of his engagements in
Egypt, he named numerically the eight or ten demi-brigades which had
been engaged. On hearing this, Madame Bertrand could not refrain from
asking how, after so long a time, he could possibly recollect all these
numbers. "Madame, this is a lover’s recollection of his former
mistresses," was Napoleon’s reply.

After dinner, the Emperor ordered my Atlas to be brought to him, for the
purpose of verifying the particulars which he had collected in his books
on Africa, and he was astonished to find every thing correspond so
accurately.

He then began to converse on trade, and the principles and systems which
he had introduced. He opposed the principles of economists, which he
said were correct in theory, though erroneous in their application. The
political constitution of different states, continued he, must render
these principles defective; local circumstances continually call for
deviations from their uniformity. Duties, he said, which were so
severely condemned by political economists, should not, it is true, be
an object to the exchequer: they should be the guarantee and protection
of a nation, and should correspond with the nature and the objects of
its trade. Holland, which is destitute of productions and manufactures,
and which has a trade only of transit and commission, should be free
from all fetters and barriers. France, on the contrary, which is rich in
every sort of production and manufactures, should incessantly guard
against the importations of a rival, who might still continue superior
to her, and also against the cupidity, egotism, and indifference of mere
brokers.

“I have not fallen into the error of modern systematizers,” said the
Emperor, "who imagine that all the wisdom of nations is centered in
themselves. Experience is the true wisdom of nations. And what does all
the reasoning of economists amount to? They incessantly extol the
prosperity of England, and hold her up as our model; but the
Custom-House system is more burthensome and arbitrary in England than in
any other country. They also condemn prohibitions; yet it was England
that set the example of prohibitions, and they are in fact necessary
with regard to certain objects. Duties cannot adequately supply the
place of prohibitions: there will always be found means to defeat the
object of the legislator. In France we are still very far behind on
these delicate points, which are still unperceived or ill-understood by
the mass of society. Yet what advancement have we not made! What
correctness of ideas has been introduced by my gradual classification of
agriculture, industry, and trade; objects so distinct in themselves, and
which present so great and positive a graduation!

"1st.—_Agriculture_; the soul, the first basis of the empire.

"2nd.—_Industry_; the comfort and happiness of the population.

"3rd.—_Foreign trade_; the superabundance, the proper application of the
surplus of agriculture and industry.

"Agriculture was continually improving during the whole course of the
Revolution. Foreigners thought it ruined in France. In 1814, however,
the English were compelled to admit that we had little or nothing to
learn from them.

"Industry or manufactures, and internal trade, made immense progress
during my reign. The application of chemistry to the manufactures caused
them to advance with giant strides. I gave an impulse, the effects of
which extended throughout Europe.

"Foreign trade, which in its results is infinitely inferior to
agriculture, was an object of subordinate importance in my mind. Foreign
trade is made for agriculture and home industry, and not the two latter
for the former. The interests of these three fundamental bases are
diverging and frequently conflicting. I always promoted them in their
natural gradation; but I could not, and ought not to have ranked them
all on an equality. Time will unfold what I have done, the national
resources which I created, and the emancipation from the English which I
brought about. We have now the secret of the commercial treaty of 1783.
France still exclaims against its author; but the English demanded it on
pain of resuming the war. They wished to do the same after the treaty of
Amiens; but I was then all-powerful; I was a hundred cubits high. I
replied that if they were in possession of the heights of Montmartre I
would still refuse to sign the treaty. These words were echoed through
Europe.

The English will now impose some such treaty on France, at least if
popular clamour, and the opposition of the mass of the nation, do not
force them to draw back. This thraldom would be an additional disgrace
in the eyes of that nation, which is now beginning to acquire a just
perception of her own interests.

"When I came to the head of the government, the American ships, which
were permitted to enter our ports on the score of their neutrality,
brought us raw materials, and had the impudence to sail from France
without freight, for the purpose of taking in cargoes of English goods
in London. They moreover had the insolence to make their payments, when
they had any to make, by giving bills on persons in London. Hence the
vast profits reaped by the English manufacturers and brokers, entirely
to our prejudice. I made a law that no American should import goods to
any amount, without immediately exporting their exact equivalent. A loud
outcry was raised against this: it was said that I had ruined trade. But
what was the consequence? Notwithstanding the closing of my ports, and
in spite of the English who ruled the seas, the Americans returned and
submitted to my regulations. What might I not have done under more
favourable circumstances?

"Thus I naturalized in France the manufacture of cotton, which
includes:—

"1st. _Spun-cotton._—We did not previously spin it ourselves; the
English supplied us with it as a sort of favour.

"2nd. _The woven-stuff._—We did not yet make it; it came to us from
abroad.

"3rd. _The printing._—This was the only part of the manufacture that we
performed ourselves. I wished to naturalize the two first branches; and
I proposed to the Council of State that their importation should be
prohibited. This excited great alarm. I sent for Oberkamp, and I
conversed with him a long time. I learned from him that this prohibition
would doubtless produce a shock, but that, after a year or two of
perseverance, it would prove a triumph, from which we should derive
immense advantages. Then I issued my decree in spite of all; this was a
true piece of statesmanship.

"I at first confined myself merely to prohibiting wove-cottons; then I
extended the prohibition to spun cotton; and we now possess within
ourselves the three branches of the cotton manufacture, to the great
benefit of our population, and the injury and regret of the
English:—which proves that, in civil government as well as in war,
decision of character is often indispensable to success. I offered a
million of francs as a reward for the discovery of a method of spinning
flax like cotton, and this discovery would undoubtedly have been
made,[24] but for our unfortunate circumstances. I should then have
prohibited cotton, if I could not have naturalized it on the continent.

Footnote 24:

  Flax is actually now spun like cotton at Verviers and Liege.

"The encouragement of the production of silk was an object that equally
claimed my attention. As Emperor of France and King of Italy I
calculated on receiving an annual revenue of 120 millions from the
production of silk.

"The system of commercial licenses was no doubt mischievous! Heaven
forbid that I should have laid it down as a principle. It was the
invention of the English; with me it was only a momentary resource. Even
the continental system, in its extent and rigour, was by me regarded
merely as a measure occasioned by the war and temporary circumstances.

“The difficulties, and even the total stagnation, of foreign trade
during my reign arose out of the force of circumstances and the
accidents of the time. One brief interval of peace would immediately
have restored it to its natural level.”

             ARTILLERY.—ITS USE.—ITS DEFECTS.—OLD SCHOOLS.

24th.—The Emperor informed us that he had spent full four-and-twenty
hours in reading the Moniteur on the subject of the Constituent
Assembly. He said that he had found these accounts as amusing as a
romance; they mark the first rise of those men who had, at a later
period, played so distinguished a part. However, he said, it was
necessary to have an idea of the external springs of action, otherwise
the reports of the proceedings of the Constituent Assembly lost much of
their interest, and were frequently unintelligible. The spirit of the
first moments, the first interests, of the Revolution remained entirely
hidden.

After dinner the Emperor conversed on the subject of Artillery. He had
wished for more uniformity and less of subdivision in the pieces. The
general was often unable to judge of the best mode of employing them,
and nothing could be superior to the advantages of uniformity in all the
instruments and accessories of war.

The Emperor observed that in general the artillery did not fire
sufficiently in a battle. The principal consideration in war is that
there should be no want of ammunition. When there is an actual scarcity,
of course, that forms an exception; but, in every other case, it is
necessary to fire incessantly. The Emperor, who had himself often been
nearly killed by spent balls, and who knew how important such an event
would have been to the fate of the battle or the campaign, maintained
the propriety of firing continually, without calculating expense.
Moreover, he said, that if he wished to avoid the post of danger, he
would station himself at the distance of 300 toises, rather than at 600.
At the first-mentioned point, the balls frequently pass over the head;
but at the latter they must fall somewhere or other.

He remarked, that it was impossible to make artillery fire on masses of
infantry, when they were themselves assailed by an opposite battery.
This arises from natural cowardice, said he, good-humouredly, from the
irresistible instinct of self-preservation. An artillery-officer who was
among us protested against this observation.—"It is nevertheless true,"
continued the Emperor; “you immediately stand on your guard against the
enemy who attacks you. You seek to destroy him, lest he should destroy
you. You often desist from firing, that he may cease to harass you, and
direct his charge against the masses of infantry, who are of much
greater importance to the fate of the battle.”

The Emperor frequently adverted to the corps of artillery, in which he
had served in his youth. He said that it was the best constituted corps
in Europe. It was a sort of family service. The officers were quite of a
paternal turn, the bravest and worthiest men in the world, pure as gold.
They were somewhat too far advanced in life, because the peace had
continued too long. The young men laughed at them, because sarcasm and
irony were the fashion of the day; but they adored them, and never
failed to render justice to their merits.[25]

Footnote 25:

  Napoleon, in his will, has given proof of this sentiment by a bequest
  in favour of Baron Duthiel, his old chief of artillery, or his
  children, “as a token of gratitude,” so he wrote with his own hand,
  “for the attention which that brave general paid to us, when, as
  lieutenant and captain, we were under his command.”

25th.—We have received the third and last package of books brought by
the frigate. The Emperor has greatly fatigued himself by assisting to
unpack and arrange them.

About three o’clock, several persons were presented to the Emperor;
among others, the Admiral and his lady. The Emperor was indisposed, and
he dined in his own chamber, attended by the Grand Marshal.

          CAMPAIGN OF ITALY.—THE EMPEROR’S OPINION OF GENERAL



DROUOT.—ON THE BATTLE OF HOHENLINDEN.

26th.—The Emperor sent for me and my son, and set us to look over the
Moniteur, for the purpose of comparing and completing the manuscript of
the Campaigns of Italy.

The Emperor, though he had announced his intention of doing so, had not
yet resumed his dictations, and I rejoiced at a circumstance which
promised at length to excite renewed interest.

Our business was to select from the Moniteur all the reports and
official letters, for the purpose of vouchers. The Emperor wished them
to be properly classed, and desired us to make an estimate of their
extent, in order that he might be able to calculate at once the space
they would occupy when printed, reminding me at the same time that these
were henceforth my own affairs; that I should only be serving myself for
the future. Delightful words, to which the tone of his voice, his
familiar air, and his whole expression, imparted even more value than
was conveyed in their meaning!

To-day, during dinner, the Emperor again reviewed the character of his
Generals. He passed an eulogium on several of them, the greater number
of whom are now no more. He bestowed the highest praise on the talents
of General Drouot. Every thing in life is a problem, said he; it is only
by what is known that we can come at what is unknown. He observed that
he knew to a certainty that General Drouot possessed every quality
necessary to make a great General. He had sufficient reasons for
supposing him superior to many of his Marshals. He had no hesitation in
believing him capable of commanding 100,000 men. “And perhaps,” added
he, “he was far from thinking so himself, which, after all, can only be
regarded as an additional good quality.”

He again alluded to the prodigious valour of Murat and Ney, whose
courage, he said, so often outstripped their judgment. Such is the
enigma, said he, of certain actions in certain individuals: the
inequality between disposition and understanding explains all.

The conversation turned on the battle of Hohenlinden. The Emperor
remarked that “it was one of those great triumphs that are brought about
by chance, and obtained without plan. Moreau, he repeated, was destitute
of invention; he was not sufficiently decided; and, therefore, he was
most fit to be employed on the defensive. Hohenlinden was a confused
sort of affair; the enemy had been unexpectedly attacked amidst his own
operations, and was conquered by troops whom he had already broken and
nearly destroyed. The merit rested chiefly with the troops and generals
of the partial corps, who had been most exposed to danger, and who had
fought like heroes.”

When speaking of the campaigns of Italy, we observed to the Emperor that
the rapid succession of his daily victories, which filled the mouth of
fame, must have been a source of great delight to him.—"By no means,"
replied he. “At least they were supposed to have been so by those who
were at a distance from the scene of conflict.”—"That may be; those who
were at a distance knew only our success; they knew nothing of our
situation. If those victories could have procured me pleasure, I should
have enjoyed repose. But I had always the aspect of danger before me,
and the victory of to-day was speedily forgotten through the obligation
of gaining another to-morrow."

I recollect having heard a distinguished General (Lamarque) deliver a
very characteristic opinion of Moreau. Lamarque had been much attached
to Moreau, and had for a long time served under him. He was endeavouring
to make me understand the different tactics of Moreau and Napoleon. He
said:—"Had their two armies been in presence, and there had been
sufficient time to move, I would have entered the ranks of Moreau, which
were sure to be managed with the utmost regularity, precision, and
calculation. On these points, it was impossible to excel, or even to
equal, Moreau. But if the two armies had to approach from points a
hundred leagues distant from each other, the Emperor would have routed
his adversary three, four, or five times over, before the latter could
have had time to look about him."

       ANNOYANCE FROM RATS.—LORD CASTLEREAGH’S IMPOSTURES.—FRENCH
                               HEIRESSES.

Thursday, 27th.—We had nearly gone without our breakfast: an incursion
of the rats, which had entered our kitchen from several points, during
the night, had deprived us of every thing eatable. We are much infested
with these vermin; they are of enormous size, and very daring and
mischievous; it took them very little time to penetrate our walls and
floors. Attracted by the smell of the victuals, they even made their way
into our drawing-room whilst we were at dinner. We were several times
obliged to give them battle after the dessert; and one evening, when the
Emperor wished to retire, and his hat was handed to him, a rat of the
largest size jumped out of it. Our grooms had tried to rear some
poultry, but they were compelled to abandon the attempt, because the
rats devoured all the fowls. They would even seize them in the night on
their perches.

The Emperor was this day translating some review or journal, in which it
was mentioned that Lord Castlereagh had asserted at a public meeting
that Napoleon, even since his fall, had not hesitated to declare that,
so long as he should have reigned, he would have continued to make war
against England, having never had any object but that of her
destruction.

The Emperor could not help feeling provoked by these words. “Lord
Castlereagh,” said he, with indignation, “must be much accustomed to
lying, and must place great dependence on the credulity of his auditors.
Can their own good sense allow them to believe that I could ever make
such a foolish speech, even if I had had such intentions!”

It was afterwards stated that Lord Castlereagh had said, in parliament,
that the reason why the French army was so much attached to Bonaparte
was that he made a kind of conscription of all the heiresses of the
empire, and then distributed them amongst his generals. “Here again,”
observed the Emperor, “Lord Castlereagh tells a wilful falsehood. He
came amongst us; he had an opportunity of seeing our manners and laws,
and of knowing the truth; he must be certain that such a thing was quite
impracticable and out of my power. What does he take our nation for? The
French were never capable of submitting to such tyranny. I have, no
doubt, made a great number of matches; and I would gladly have made
thousands more; it was one of the most effectual methods of amalgamating
and uniting irreconcileable factions. If I had had more time to myself,
I would have taken great pains to extend these unions to the provinces,
and even to the Confederation of the Rhine, in order to strengthen the
connection of those distant portions of the empire with France; but in
such proceedings, I exerted only my influence, and never my authority.
Lord Castlereagh disregards such distinctions; it is important to his
policy to render me odious; he is not scrupulous about the means; he
does not shrink from any calumny; he has every advantage over me. I am
in chains; he has taken all possible precautions for keeping my mouth
shut, and preventing the possibility of my making any reply, and I am a
thousand leagues from the scene of action; his position is commanding;
nothing stands in his way. But certainly this conduct is the _ne plus
ultra_ of impudence, baseness, and cowardice.”

I shall now introduce an instance which may serve to prove the truth of
the foregoing assertion of Napoleon with respect to French heiresses. I
had the account from the lips of the person chiefly interested.

M. d’Aligre had a daughter who was heiress to immense property: the
Emperor conceived the idea of marrying her to M. de Caulaincourt, Duke
of Vicenza, for whom he had such a particular regard that he was looked
upon as a kind of favourite. His personal qualities, not less than his
high official employment, rendered him one of the first personages in
the empire. The Emperor, therefore, never imagined that there could be
the slightest impediment to this union. He sent for M. d’Aligre, who
often came to Court, and made his request; but M. d’Aligre had other
views, and declined the alliance. Napoleon urged it in every possible
way, but M. d’Aligre remained immoveable. From his manner of relating
the affair to me, it was evident that he thought he had shewn great
courage, and, in fact, he deserved the credit of having done so, for he
imagined, like all of us, that it was very dangerous to thwart the
Emperor’s inclinations. We were, however, all mistaken; we did not know
Napoleon. I am now convinced that the justice due to individuals, and to
family rights in particular, are sacred to him; and I never heard that
M. d’Aligre suffered any inconvenience whatever through his refusal.

After dinner, the Emperor tried some of Pigault Le Brun’s romances and
others of the same kind, but in vain: after turning over a few pages of
each, he rejected them all, saying that they were all in very bad taste.

                THE GOVERNOR’S STATEMENTS RESPECTING THE
                       EXPENSES AT LONGWOOD, &C.

Friday, 28th.—Towards one o’clock, the Emperor sent for me and my son.
We carried him the first chapter of the Campaigns of Italy, with our
last work completing it. He detained us until almost six o’clock.

The Governor had paid a visit to the Grand Marshal, and in a vague
manner given him reason to expect some reductions at Longwood. He had
stated, with some simplicity, that it had been expected at London that
the permission which had been offered us to return to Europe would have
greatly diminished the Emperor’s domestic circle. He had also said,
without being well understood by the Grand Marshal, that, if we had any
private property, we might avail ourselves of our own money, by drawing
upon our own funds, as I had already done. His government, he said, had
never intended to allow the Emperor more than a table for four persons
daily at most, and company to dine once a-week. What a statement! Is it
possible that he meant to insinuate that, with respect to us, we ought
to pay for our maintenance, and contribute, for the future, to the
expenses of the establishment? Let it not be thought incredible: we
daily learn here to believe that there is nothing impossible.

The Emperor, afterwards, reverting to a book which he had been reading,
and in which there was a story of an Irish lady, respecting whom
Goldsmith had abused him violently, recollected well, he said, that,
being at Bayonne at the chateau de Marrach, when the city of Bourdeaux
gave him a _fête_, he saw, by the side of the Empress Josephine, a
charming face of the most perfect beauty, with which he was forcibly
struck. The impression she had made did not pass unperceived. It had
been anticipated and brought about designedly. “God knows,” said the
Emperor, “with what intention. She was a Miss ——, afterwards Madame ——,
a new reader to the Empress Josephine, whom she attended to the chateau
de Marrach, and might very possibly have had great success. She already
occupied my thoughts, when M. de Lavalette, who was at the head of the
secret department of the post-office, destroyed the charm. He sent,
direct to me, a letter addressed to this young lady. It was from her
mother, or her aunt, an Irishwoman, and contained minute directions for
the part she was to play, and particularly urged her by all means to
contrive to secure such a living pledge as might prolong her empire, or
at least secure her great influence. On reading this,” said the Emperor,
“all illusion vanished. The coarseness of the intrigue, the turpitude of
the details, the style, the hand which had written the letter; but,
above all, her being a foreigner, produced immediate disgust; and the
pretty little Irish girl was, in fact, as Goldsmith says, put into a
post-chaise and suddenly packed off to Paris. And here I find,”
continued Napoleon, “a libel imputing this to me as a crime, when, in
fact, it was much rather a virtue in me; an act of continence, of which
I might, perhaps, boast with much more reason than the famous Scipio.
But this is the way in which history is written.”

After dinner, when we were debating what we should read, the Emperor
said that, since we confessed we had not wit enough to relate each his
tale or story, we ought at least to be condemned to choose, by turns,
our evening’s reading; and he began by naming for his part, the poem _De
la Pitié_, by the Abbé Delille. He thought the verses good, the language
pure, the ideas pleasing; nevertheless, he observed, it was destitute of
imagination or warmth. It was, undoubtedly, superior in versification to
Voltaire; but still far beneath our other great masters.

Saturday, 29th.—The Emperor breakfasted in the garden, and invited us
all. After breakfast he took an airing in the calash. He was in good
spirits, and rallied us all in our turns. One he complimented on the
beauty and elegance of his apartments, another on the sums which the
Governor had paid for him, and which would soon be increased by a
handsome stock of child-bed linen; me he congratulated on the taste
which the Governor seemed to have for my bills of exchange, which had
induced his Excellency to wish the rest to draw bills likewise. He
laughed, and was highly amused with our remarks on each other. The
weather suddenly changed and obliged him to return home.

After dinner, the Emperor read some passages of Milton, translated by
the Abbé Delille. He thought the versification very inferior to the poem
_De la Pitié_; and, in fact, it was a work prescribed to the author,
written during his emigration, whilst at London, and published by
subscription.

During the whole of our morning’s ride, the conversation turned on our
kings and their mistresses: Mesdames de Montespan, de Pompadour,
Dubarry, &c. The principle was warmly discussed, opinions differed, and
were obstinately defended. The Emperor amused himself with fluctuating
alternately from one opinion to another. He concluded, however, by
deciding in favour of morality.

POLITICAL HISTORY OF THE COURT OF LONDON DURING OUR EMIGRATION.—GEORGE
  III.—MR. PITT.—THE PRINCE OF WALES.—ANECDOTES.—THE NASSAUS.—REMARKABLE
  DIGRESSION OF NAPOLEON TO HIS OWN HISTORY.

Sunday, 30th.—The Emperor desired me to be called early in the morning
to breakfast with him; he was sad, gloomy, and unable to converse; he
could not find words. Chance having produced the mention of London and
of my emigration, the Emperor said, by way of fixing on a subject, and
finding something to occupy his attention, “You must have seen in
London, the Court, the King, the Prince of Wales, Mr. Pitt, Mr. Fox, and
other great personages who figured at that time? Tell me what you know
of them. What did people think of them? Give me an historical
sketch.”—"Sire, your Majesty forgets, or perhaps was never precisely
informed of the situation of an emigrant in London. I doubt whether we
should have been received at Court; the good old George III. was deeply
concerned for our personal misfortunes, but he was extremely reluctant
to avow us in a political sense. And if we could have been received
there, our means would not have enabled us to appear. I did not
therefore go to Court. I have, however, seen most of those whom your
Majesty mentions, and I have also heard much said of them.

"I have seen and heard the King several times in the House of Lords, and
been very near him; the Prince of Wales in the same place, and also in
company in the metropolis. Besides, it is not in London as in France; we
do not find there that immense distance between the Court and the mass
of the nation; the country is so crowded, information so general,
education so equal, affluence so common, and the sphere of activity so
rapid, that the whole nation seems to be in the same place and on the
same plane; whilst, in looking at this assemblage, which might deserve
to be called distinguished, one is tempted to ask, _Where is the
people?_ which is, in fact, the question that Alexander is said to have
asked at the time of his visit to London. It follows then, that having
seen many people of all classes, conditions, and opinions, I must have
imbibed some notions approaching in all probability very near the truth.
Unluckily, I was then little solicitous about observing and collecting
information; and I am likewise fearful that the lapse of so much time
may now confuse my memory.

"George the Third was the honestest man in his dominions; his personal
virtues made him an object of profound veneration; an extreme morality,
and great respect for the laws, were the principal characteristics of
his whole life. He came to the throne at twenty years of age, deeply
enamoured of a charming young Scotch lady, of one of the first families
in the country, it was much feared that he would marry her; but it was
sufficient to remind him that it was contrary to law, and he instantly
consented to marry the person who should be chosen for him. This was a
princess of Mecklenburg. In his grief, he thought her very ordinary, and
in fact she was so; nevertheless George III. remained all his life an
exemplary husband; he was never known to be guilty of the least
infidelity.

"The accession of George III. was an actual political revolution in
England: the days of the Pretenders were over; the house of Hanover was
established; the Whigs, who had placed that family on the throne, were
dismissed from administration: they were troublesome observers, who were
no longer wanted. The government was again seized by the Tories, those
friends of power, who have ever since kept it, to the great detriment of
public liberty.

"The King, however, was personally free from prejudice in this respect:
he sincerely loved the laws, justice, and the welfare and prosperity of
his country. The violent part taken by England against our French
revolution was much less the fault of George III. than of Mr. Pitt, who
was the real firebrand. The latter was instigated by the extreme hatred
to France which he inherited from his father, the great Chatham, and
also by a strong predilection for power and the oligarchy. At the
commencement of our revolution, Mr. Pitt was the man of the people: he
governed England; he drew in the King, who was always to be worked on by
facts; and it must be acknowledged that the excesses and crimes of our
outset afforded very favourable opportunities to the measures and the
eloquence of Mr. Pitt. It is probable, Sire, that if the unfortunate
George III. had retained his reason, your Majesty would eventually have
found it greatly to your advantage, because your reign would have
presented new facts to his observation, to which he would have yielded.
George III. had his own species and degree of character: it was in
harmony with his intellectual conceptions: he wished to know things, to
be convinced. When once his resolution was taken, it was difficult to
make him alter it; yet it was not impossible: his good sense afforded
great opportunities.

"His illness was, on this account, a curse to us, a curse to Europe, and
to the English themselves, who begin now to give up the high opinion
they once professed of Mr. Pitt, of whose fatal errors they now feel the
effects.

"It was the first attack of the King’s illness which established the
reputation and credit of Mr. Pitt. That minister was little more than
twenty-five years of age, when he ventured alone to encounter the mass
of those who deserted the King and considered him lost; and who were
eager to proclaim the monarch’s incapacity, in order to possess
themselves of power under his youthful successor. This conduct rendered
Mr. Pitt the idol of the nation. This was the most glorious period of
his life; and his noblest triumph was, undoubtedly, that of conducting
George III. to St. Paul’s, to return thanks to God for his restoration
to health, amidst an immense concourse of people intoxicated with joy
and satisfaction.

"There was no doubt that Mr. Pitt was on this occasion the saviour of
the King as well as of the public peace; for experience proved that
George III. had not become incapable of reigning again; and it was
strongly suspected that, had the regency been organized, as the
Opposition wished to have it, this capability would not have been very
readily acknowledged at a subsequent period; and thus a civil war might
have been occasioned.

"I have often heard it said that the mental derangement of George III.
was not a common kind of madness: that his alienation did not exactly
arise from a local affection of the brain, but from the repletion of the
vessels leading to it; a derangement produced by a malady which had long
been peculiar to this family. His disorder, it was said, was rather
delirium than insanity. When the cause was removed, the sovereign
instantly recovered all his faculties, in as great perfection as if they
had sustained no interruption; this circumstance explains his numerous
relapses and restorations. As a proof of this, people used to mention
the strength of mind he must have possessed, to be able, immediately on
his first convalescence, to support the pomp of the procession, attended
by the assembled population of London, filling the air with
acclamations.

"After his second relapse, he gave another not less remarkable proof of
this nature, by the calmness and composure which he displayed, when
fired at by an assassin, as he entered his box at the theatre. He was so
little disturbed that he instantly turned to the Queen, who had just
reached the door of the box, to tell her not to be alarmed, for that it
was only a squib which had been let off in the theatre: he remained
during the whole performance apparently unmoved. Here was certainly no
proof of weakness. The permanence of the complaint in his latter years
might indeed be opposed to these facts, if it be certain that he had not
long lucid intervals.

"George III., although so worthy and well-meaning a monarch, was several
times very near falling a victim to assassins. Several instances of this
kind occur in his history; and I do not believe any of the persons
implicated suffered death, because they all appeared to be insane—all
religious or political fanatics. The last and most famous attempt
occurred, I think, in 1800.[26] The King went to the theatre, as he did
from time to time at that critical period, to keep up his popularity. As
he entered his box, a man in the pit took aim at him with a horse
pistol, and the ball only missed through the King’s bowing at the moment
to salute the public. The dreadful tumult that ensued may easily be
conceived! The man did not attempt to deny his crime; he was precisely
such another as the fanatic at Schoenbrun, who would have sacrificed
your Majesty, and always maintained that he had no other object in view
than peace and the happiness of his country. A jury pronounced this man
insane, and he was condemned to confinement.

Footnote 26:

  The author seems not to be aware that this is the very attempt to
  which he had just adverted.—_Translator._

"During my excursion to London in 1814, a singular chance procured me a
sight of this very assassin. My mind being still occupied with the
mission which your Majesty had confided to me the preceding year,
concerning the depôts of mendicity and houses of correction, I wished to
see the English establishments of this kind. Whilst I was taking a
minute survey of Newgate, I entered an apartment in which I found a
great number of condemned persons enjoying a certain degree of liberty.
The first on whom my conductor fixed his eyes happened to be Hatfield,
whom he pointed out to me, and whose name I immediately recollected, and
asked if he was the man who had attempted to assassinate George III. It
was the same, he said, and he was undergoing the confinement to which he
had been condemned, as insane, in Newgate. I observed that, at the time,
his insanity had been much doubted and contested by the public, as it
always happens in such cases. I was assured, however, that Hatfield was
indisputably mad, but only by fits; that his madness was, however, so
mild that he was suffered to go about the town, on his word; and that he
was the first to request he might be attended to, when he felt that his
disorder was coming on. My conductor then called him. Having ventured to
ask him some questions, he immediately discovered me to be French by my
accent, and told me he had often fought against my countrymen in
Flanders. (He had served in the light-horse, or dragoons, under the Duke
of York.) He bore their marks, he said, shewing me several scars; and
yet, he added, he was far from hating them, for they were brave, and
were not to blame in that affair; people had insisted on meddling in
their disputes, which concerned themselves only. He began to grow very
warm, which induced my conductor to make me a sign, and to send him
away. We had touched the chord of his derangement, my conductor
observed, and had we continued, he would have become outrageous.

"But I return to George III. The predominant sentiment of that prince
was the love of the public good and the welfare of his country. To these
he always sacrificed every consideration: this alone induced him to
retain Mr. Pitt so long, towards whom he felt a strong repugnance,
because he was very ill-treated by that minister.

"The crisis was of the most vital importance to England; the danger most
imminent; the talents of the Prime Minister of a superior kind. He was,
therefore, necessary. Presuming on the omnipotence of this circumstance
over the King’s mind, Mr. Pitt ruled him tyrannically, and without the
least delicacy; he scarcely allowed him the disposal of the most
trifling place. If there was a vacancy, and the King wished to reward a
private servant of his own, he was always too late; Mr. Pitt had already
disposed of it, and for the good of the state, he would say—for the sake
of parliamentary services. If the King shewed too much dissatisfaction,
Mr. Pitt had one invariable answer constantly ready—he would resign and
give up his place to another. At length a circumstance occurred of the
most delicate kind, as it concerned the King’s conscience, who was very
religious; that is to say, the question of the emancipation of the
Catholics of Ireland, to which he obstinately refused to consent. Mr.
Pitt insisted with equal perseverance; he was pledged to this measure,
he said, and resorted to his usual threat. But the King this time took
him at his word, and, overjoyed at his deliverance, repeated the same
day, to several persons, that he had now got rid of a man who had for
twenty years been kicking at him. And it may not, perhaps, be useless to
observe here, as a remarkable singularity, in contrast to Mr. Pitt’s ill
usage of the King, that George III. has been heard to say that, of all
his ministers, Mr. Fox (so much accused of republicanism, and perhaps
not without foundation) was the person who, when at the head of affairs,
had constantly shewn him the greatest delicacy, deference, respect, and
attention.

"Nevertheless, such was the influence of the public interest over the
King’s mind that, notwithstanding all his aversion, he reinstated Mr.
Pitt a year afterwards. It was thought, at the time, that when Mr. Pitt
retired he had had the address to fix Mr. Addington, a creature of his
own, in the ministry, in order to be able to replace himself there in a
short time without difficulty: but it has since been proved that Mr.
Pitt himself was obliged to have recourse to intrigues to overthrow his
successor and obtain his second administration, which, however, was by
no means worthy of him: it was filled with disasters which he himself
had occasioned. The ball that decided the victory of Austerlitz killed
him in London.

"Time daily undermines the great reputation of Mr. Pitt, not with
respect to his eminent talents, but their fatal employment. England
groans under the calamities with which he overwhelmed her, the most
fatal of which are the school and the doctrines he bequeathed to her. He
introduced the police into England, accustomed the nation to an armed
force, and commenced that system of informations, snares, and
demoralization of every kind so completely perfected by his successors.

“His great system of tactics was constantly to excite our excesses on
the Continent, and then to hold them up as a scarecrow to England,
which immediately granted him all he wanted.” “But what did you all
say to that?” asked the Emperor: “What was the opinion of the
emigrants?”—"Sire," I replied, “we all constantly saw through the same
glass; what we said the first day of our emigration we still repeated
on the last day of our exile. We had not advanced one step; we had
become and remained a people by ourselves. Mr. Pitt was our oracle;
whatever was said by him, by Burke, Windham, or any of the most
violent on that side of the question, appeared to us to be delicious;
all that their adversaries objected, abominable. Fox, Sheridan, and
Grey, were in our eyes nothing but infamous Jacobins; we never called
them by any other name.” “Very well,” said the Emperor; “now return to
George III.”

"This virtuous prince was excessively partial to private life and rural
occupations; he devoted all the time he could spare from the business of
the state to the cultivation of a farm a few miles from London; he never
returned to the capital except for his regular levées, or extraordinary
councils required by circumstances; and he immediately returned to his
fields, where he lived without pomp, and like an honest farmer, as he
said himself. All intrigues were left in town, about the ministers, and
amongst them.

"George III. had many domestic troubles. His sister was Matilda Queen of
Denmark, whose story forms so melancholy a romance; his two brothers
caused him many vexations by their marriages; and he had not reason to
be perfectly satisfied with his eldest son.

“The two brothers of George III. were the Duke of Cumberland and the
Duke of Gloucester. I often saw the latter in private society; he was
the worthiest, most polite, and honourable gentleman in England. Both
these illustrious individuals, according to the spirit of the British
constitution, were entirely strangers to public business. The King heard
that one of them had married or was about to marry a private individual.
This was a great crime in his estimation; he had himself made a great
sacrifice to avoid committing it. He was extremely angry; and whilst he
was sending a message to Parliament against the brother who had thus
given offence, he was informed that the other had eloped to Calais for a
similar purpose. It was like a fatality, an absolute epidemic, for it
was at the same time reported on all sides, that the heir-apparent
himself was also secretly married.”—"What," said the Emperor, “the
Prince of Wales!”—"Yes, Sire, himself: his marriage was every where
talked of, but with circumstances not sufficiently certain for me to
venture to repeat them; the fact, however, seemed generally
acknowledged. But, as the Prince afterwards caused it to be contradicted
in Parliament, through the medium of the opposition, we are bound after
that to believe him.

"I have it, however, from the mouth of a very near relation of his
pretended wife, that the matter was positively so. I heard this person
give way to the most violent rage on the solemn marriage of the prince,
and threaten to resort to personal violence. It might, therefore, be
considered a contested point, which was unavoidably represented
according to party-spirit; some obstinately maintaining the reality of
the marriage, whilst others denied it in the most violent manner.
Perhaps this contradiction might be reconciled by the consideration that
the person he was said to have married, Mrs. Fitzherbert, was a
Catholic. This circumstance rendered the marriage impossible in the eyes
of the law, and perfectly void with respect to the heir to the throne.
However this may be, I have often met Mrs. Fitzherbert in company: her
carriage bore the Prince’s arms, and her servants wore his livery. This
lady was much older than himself; but beautiful, agreeable, of a
powerful mind, and haughty, impatient temper, which often involved her
in disputes with the Prince, and gave rise, it was said, to scenes of
violence not very becoming such elevated rank. It was during one of the
last quarrels of this kind, when, they say, Mrs. Fitzherbert had
obstinately kept the door shut against the Prince, that Mr. Pitt
dexterously took the opportunity of persuading him to consent to a
marriage with the Princess of Brunswick."—"But stay," said the Emperor,
“you go too fast; you pass over what chiefly interests me. Under what
auspices did the Prince of Wales enter into life? What was there
peculiar in his political conduct, his situation with regard to the
Opposition, and so forth?”—"This Prince, Sire, came before the public
with all the advantages of face, person, and mind. He was greeted with
universal enthusiasm; but he soon evinced those inclinations, and began
to act that part, which seemed necessarily imposed on great personages
in the middle of the last century. Such were the infatuation of gaming,
and its consequent embarrassments; table and other excesses; and, above
all, a set of companions disapproved of by the public. Then it was that
all generous hearts were grieved; hope was blighted, and the middling
class, which in every country really constitutes the nation, and which,
it must be confessed, is in England the most moral population of all
Europe, despaired of the future. It was a received adage in England,
amongst the lower classes in particular, that the Prince of Wales would
never reign; the fortune-tellers and conjurors, it was said, had
foretold it to himself.

“The opposition, into whose arms he had thrown himself, as heirs
presumptive too frequently do; the opposition, whose stay and hope he
was, perhaps trying to deceive themselves, when this misconduct was
mentioned to them, used to get over it by saying that he would be
another Henry V.; that Henry V. had been extremely dissipated when
Prince of Wales; but that he became the greatest King the monarchy had
produced; and thence they concluded that the Prince of Wales would make
one of their greatest kings.”—"But did he adopt the revolutionary party
and defend our modern ideas?" said the Emperor. "No, Sire; as the fever
of revolutionary principles increased, decency compelled him to withdraw
by degrees from the opposition which defended them. He relinquished all
ostensible alliance, and filled up the void of his life by giving
himself up to pleasure and its attendant difficulties. He was constantly
overwhelmed with debts, although parliament had already paid them
several times. By these encumbrances he was greatly embarrassed, and his
character and popularity were endangered. It was whilst thus involved,
and during a quarrel with Mrs. Fitzherbert, that Mr. Pitt got hold of
him, offering to pay his debts again, if he would adopt his father’s
views and consent to marry. He was obliged to submit to all that was
prescribed, and the hand of the Princess of Brunswick was asked and
obtained. But, during the short interval of the negotiation, a
celebrated woman who had long aspired to govern the prince, finding the
place vacant, took possession of it herself. It is pretended that she
has said she had sought this connection for twenty years; for she was
much older than himself, a circumstance which seemed to indicate a
peculiar taste in this family, having also been remarked in several of
his brothers. This person was immediately appointed Lady of the
Bed-chamber to the future Princess of Wales; she even went to meet her
and bring her to England. It was under such auspices, such malignant
influence, that the bride landed on the British shore. Accordingly, it
is positively asserted that this unhappy princess had not even so much
as twenty-four hours’ enjoyment, out of that privileged period
emphatically called by the English the honey-moon. From the very day
after her marriage, ridicule, neglect, and contempt were her portion.

"All who possessed the least spark of generosity or morality in England
took her part, and loudly exclaimed against the manner in which she was
treated. The greater share of the odium, however, fell on Lady Jersey,
who was accused of having bewitched the prince. She became the object of
public execration; yet the Prince, it was declared could not plead the
excuse of illusion or blindness; for it is said that, after a very gay
entertainment amongst his jovial companions, one of them was led, in the
course of conversation, to say that he knew the Madame de Merteuil of
the Liaisons Dangereuses. Many of the others immediately cried out that
they also knew one: upon this, it is said, the Prince proposed, for a
frolic, that each should write his secret separately. All the notes were
thrown into a vase; and the name of Lady Jersey was found written on
every one of them: the Prince himself, not having looked for such
unanimity, or expected to be discovered, had written this name as well
as the rest.

"I knew this Lady Jersey, and it must be confessed that her face and
whole appearance were so little indicative of her age, that it could not
easily have been suspected. She had all the charms of early youth,
heightened by all the grace of the most elegant manners; and I am bound
to say, that, in the circles in which I saw her, she even possessed a
sort of attractive kindness; whether the manners of her class render the
disposition indulgent, or whether she did not in fact deserve all the
reproaches with which she was loaded.

“The Prince of Wales seems to have possessed a peculiar faculty, a gift,
which the English call the power of fascination. He is endowed with it
in the highest degree; one would think that his will was sufficient to
reclaim the attachment of the multitude, and as it were to corrupt
public opinion. His history is full of those losses and returns of
popularity; and, perhaps, it is the certainty of being able to command
this sort of success that has so often led him, as his detractors say,
to disregard public opinion. His enemies have asserted that he has
carried this species of courage to absolute heroism. They have censured
him for his hardihood in persisting, whilst lying himself under the
reproach of an irregular life, in accusing his wife of that conduct of
which he set the example; an inconsistency which ought, undoubtedly, to
be attributed to the fatal suggestions of pernicious counsellors,
inimical to his glory and tranquillity. It is at least certain, that the
basest corruption, the aid of the laws, and the influence of the heir to
the throne, were all employed against the Princess, and all in vain: a
circumstance which, it is said, used to torment the Prince and expose
him to ridicule. People laughed at his unprecedented ill-luck, in being
unable to prove, with all his endeavours, what so many husbands would
give so much to conceal. Hatred increased on every new defeat, and with
it the sufferings of the victim. She was reduced, at last, to a sort of
banishment, to a place a few miles from London; she was deprived of her
daughter; she was insulted in the sight of the allied Sovereigns when
they visited London. But the expression of the feelings of the multitude
was always ready to avenge her, and it became necessary to get her to
quit England; which she was induced to do voluntarily, by the aid,
perhaps, of the perfidious insinuations of some pretended friend.”

Here the Emperor again interrupted me, saying that I was leaving out a
very essential point. “When and how had the Prince attained the Royal
authority? How had he arranged matters with the opposition? What had he
done with those old friends?” “Sire,” I replied, "my information ends
here. There was a time when political events induced your Majesty to cut
off all intercourse between England and France. We no longer obtained
the papers; we were prevented from receiving letters; the two nations
had no longer any thing in common. There is, therefore, an actual blank
in my intelligence, which I should be unwilling to fill up with mere
conjectures. I understand, however, that after several recoveries and
relapses of the old King, all parties at length agreed to consign the
regency to the Prince of Wales, and place him in full possession of the
sovereign authority. The long expected period of changes and of hopes
was at length arrived. The gates of heaven were now to open, at length,
to that opposition which had so long eulogised the Prince; to those old
friends who had seemed from infancy to unite their fate with his. But,
to the great and universal surprise of the nation, and through I know
not what contrivance of Lord Castlereagh’s, nothing was altered. Those
old ministers, who had so long been the objects of the Prince’s dislike
and censure, kept their places, and those intimate and dearly beloved
friends, who had so long been caressed, remained out of office.

"The opposition complained loudly; but they were laughed at, and told
that when the wild Prince of Wales became a great King, his first care
was to get rid of his old companions. The jest might be a very good one,
but it was by no means applicable; for the greatest characters in the
empire were at the head of this opposition; and they were far from being
Falstaffs or profligates of that kind. From that instant they evinced a
marked coolness towards the Prince: some would no longer see him; others
refused his invitations, or repelled the advances which he made to them.
It is said, however, that one of them suffered himself to be persuaded
to go to dine in private with the Prince. The latter, recurring to his
usual victorious weapons, endeavoured to prove to him, with his
accustomed grace, that he could not have acted differently; and at
length desired to be told of what his old friends could justly accuse
him. The guest, whose heart was still swelling with indignation, seized
the opportunity, and freely told him all his faults, with such warmth,
that the Princess Charlotte, who was at table, and was perhaps secretly
inclined towards the guest’s opinion, burst into tears. Lord Byron heard
of this scene the next day, and consecrated the event in these
celebrated verses:—

             "Weep, daughter of a royal line,
               A Sire’s disgrace, a realm’s decay;
             Ah happy! if each tear of thine
               Could wash a father’s fault away!
             Weep, for thy tears are virtue’s tears,
               Auspicious to these suff’ring isles;
             And be each drop, in future years,
               Repaid thee by thy people’s smiles."
                                               March, 1812.

“In 1814, at the time of my visit to London, I had the honour of being
presented to the Prince of Wales at Carlton House.”—“And what the devil
did you want there?” said the Emperor. “I do not wonder that your
Majesty is surprised; but I was induced by a sort of point of honour: I
thought I could do no other. There were many French in London at that
time; I was the only one who had been near your Majesty’s person, worn
your colours, and followed the line of conduct which seemed to be
censured at that period. Some one having told me that the others would
certainly not endure my presence, that circumstance determined me to go.
We were, in fact, twenty-two Frenchmen, presented at the same time, at
one of the Prince’s grand levees; and I must say that I never saw more
graceful manners, more pleasing expression, more harmony in the
_tout-ensemble_; I thought him the _beau-ideal_ of elegance. I
comprehended the full power, the whole truth of that magic fascination
which I had so often heard attributed to him; and even at this moment,
Sire, when I recollect that fine countenance, on which I thought I
perceived elevation of mind, and the love and desire of glory, I cannot
help asking myself how your Majesty comes to be here, how those
atrocious ministers could induce him to declare himself the gaoler,
the...?” “My dear Sir,” said the Emperor, “perhaps you were no
physiognomist; you took the halo of coquetry for that of greatness; the
study to please for the love of glory; and, besides, the love of glory
is not exactly in the face; it is in the recesses of the heart, and you
did not search there.[27]

Footnote 27:

  Since this was said, the great victim has fallen. I, his servant, saw
  his torments begin; others have communicated to me his last sufferings
  and protracted agonies. He expired! His enemies never ceased to strike
  him, in the name of the Prince! This immortal victim accordingly left
  with his own hand, these dreadful words: “_I bequeath the infamy of my
  death to the reigning family of England!_”

“But were you not translating to me, the other day,” said the Emperor,
"some journal or work, in which it was stated that the Prince Regent had
made a great display of sympathy towards the last Stuarts; that he had
paid the most extravagant prices for things which had belonged to, and
been left by them; that he had talked of raising a monument to the last
of them? There is much more calculation than magnanimity in all that; it
is because he is anxious to establish and consecrate their extinction.
From that event his legitimacy and security date; and he is in the
right. If, in my time, and under the circumstances into which the
English Ministers had plunged the nation, there had been some young
Stuart, of a brave and enterprising character, equal to the present age,
he would have been landed in Ireland, escorted by the modern doctrines;
and then we should undoubtedly have seen the regenerate Stuarts driving
out the degenerate Brunswicks. England would have had its 20th of March.
Such are thrones and their contagious influence; scarcely is one seated
there when the poison begins to operate. These Brunswicks, brought in by
liberal ideas, raised by the will of the people, have no sooner ascended
the throne, than they grasp at arbitrary and despotic power; they must
absolutely drive their wheels in the track which overturned their
predecessors; and this because they are become Kings! And it should seem
that this is the inevitable course! That fine stem of the Nassaus, for
instance, those patrons of noble independence in Europe, whose
liberalism ought to be in the blood, and even in the marrow of their
bones; those Nassaus, who, as far as regards their dominions, would be
only at the tail, and who might by their doctrines, place themselves at
the head,—they have just been placed on a throne; well, you will
infallibly see them concern themselves about nothing but becoming what
they call legitimates; and adopt the principles, the proceedings, and
the errors of that class.

“Nay, after all, my dear Sir, has not the same thing been said of me,
myself? and perhaps not without some appearance of reason; for probably
many circumstances may have escaped my observation. Nevertheless I
declared, on a solemn occasion, that in my estimation the sovereign
power was not in the title, nor the throne in its splendour. It has been
said of me, that scarcely had I attained power, when I exercised a
despotic and arbitrary sway; but it was rather a Dictatorship; and the
circumstances of the times will be a sufficient excuse for me. I have
also been reproached with having suffered myself to be intoxicated with
pride at my alliance with the house of Austria, and having thought
myself more truly a sovereign after my marriage; in fact, of having
considered myself from that time as Alexander, become the son of a god!
But can all this be just? Did I really fall into such errors? A young,
handsome, agreeable, woman fell to my lot; was it inadmissible for me to
testify some satisfaction? Could I not devote a few moments to her
without incurring blame? Was I not to be allowed to abandon myself to a
few hours of happiness? Was I required to use my wife ill from the very
first night, like your Prince ——? Or was I, like the Sultan we have read
of, to have her head struck off, in order to escape the reproaches of
the multitude? No! my only fault in that alliance was that of carrying
too plebeian a heart with me. How often have I said that the heart of a
statesman ought only to be in his head. Mine, unfortunately, in this
instance, remained in its place, subject to family feelings, and this
marriage ruined me; because I believed, above all things, in the
religion, the piety, the morality, and the honour of Francis I. He has
cruelly deceived me. I am willing to believe that he was himself
deceived; and I forgive him with all my heart. But will history spare
him? If, however,...”

Here Napoleon was silent for a few moments, resting his head on one of
his hands; then resuming, “But what a romance is my life!” said he,
rising. “Open the door, and let us walk.” And we walked up and down the
adjoining rooms, for some time.

MY SON’S FALL FROM HIS HORSE.—PILLAGE IN WAR.—CHARACTER OF THE FRENCH
  SOLDIER.—PARTICULARS RELATING TO WATERLOO, BY THE NEW ADMIRAL.

Monday July 1st to Thursday 4th.—Yesterday, my son’s horse ran away with
him, whilst he was taking a ride; and, being fearful that the horse
might dash him against the trees, he thought it best to throw himself
off his back. He had sprained his ancle sufficiently to condemn him to
the sofa for a month.

The Emperor condescended to come into my room, about 11 o’clock, to
learn the state of my son, whom he rated well for his awkwardness. I
followed him into the garden, where he breakfasted, which he had not
done there for some time previously.

The conversation turned on pillage by armies, and the horrors occasioned
by it.

Pavia, the Emperor said, was the only place that he had ever given up to
pillage; he had promised it to his soldiers for 24 hours; “but after
three hours,” said he, “I could bear it no longer, and I put an end to
it. I had but 1200 men;” said he, “the cries of the populace which
reached my ears prevailed. If there had been 20,000 soldiers, their
numbers would have drowned the complaints of the people, and I should
have heard nothing of it. Happily, however, policy and morality are
equally opposed to the system of pillage. I have meditated much on this
subject: and have often been urged to gratify my soldiers in this
manner. But nothing is so certain to disorganize and completely ruin an
army. A soldier loses all discipline as soon as he gets an opportunity
to pillage; and, if by pillage he enriches himself, he immediately
becomes a bad soldier, and will not fight. Besides,” continued he,
“pillage is incompatible with our French manners; the hearts of our
soldiers are not bad; when the first transport of fury is over, they
come to themselves again. It would be impossible for French soldiers to
pillage for twenty-four hours; many of them would employ the latter part
of the time in repairing the mischief they had done in the beginning.
They afterwards reproach each other, in their quarters, with the
excesses they have committed, and load with reprobation and contempt
those whose conduct has been particularly odious.”

About three o’clock, the new Admiral, Sir Pulteney Malcolm, and all his
officers, were presented to the Emperor. The Admiral first conversed
with the Emperor alone, for nearly two hours. He must have been much
impressed with this conversation, for he said, as he came out, that he
had been taking a very fine and valuable lesson on the history of
France.

The Emperor was understood to have said to him, towards the close of the
interview, what I believe I have already introduced elsewhere on this
subject. “You have levied a contribution of 700 millions on France; I
have imposed one of more than 10,000 millions on your country. You
raised yours by your bayonets: I caused mine to be raised by your
parliament.” “And that is the true summary of the matter,” replied the
Admiral.

The Admiral was bringing from America some old troops consisting of
12,000 men, without the least suspicion of the new state of Europe. At
sea, a vessel informed him of the return of the Emperor from the isle of
Elba, and the consequent revolution; it seemed to him so magical that he
could scarcely believe it. But when he arrived in sight of Plymouth, he
received orders to proceed, with all possible expedition, to Ostend; he
reached it in time, and 4000 of the men on board his ships were enabled
to take part in the battle, and they were unquestionably amongst the
best troops in the whole line, as the Admiral declared. Who can
determine what degree of influence they may have had? The English
thought the battle lost, during the whole day, and they acknowledge that
it would have been so, but for Grouchy’s error.

             ANECDOTES ON THE 18TH BRUMAIRE.—SIEYES.—GRAND

ELECTOR.—CAMBACERES.—LEBRUN, &C.

After walking some time in the garden, the Emperor got into his calash.
The weather was delightful: we made two turns at full gallop. I was
alone with him. He spoke much of my son, and his future prospects, with
a degree of interest and kindness which went to my heart. He said that,
considering his age, the circumstance of being sent to St. Helena was of
inestimable value to his future life; that it must be like a hot-house
for bringing forward his character.

After dinner, the Emperor resumed the subject of the 18th Brumaire, and
related it to us with an infinite number of minor details. As he has
long since dictated it to General Gourgaud, I shall refer to his
publication for the mass of the particulars of that event. I shall only
give here some little anecdotes or accessories which possibly may not be
found there.

Napoleon’s situation on his return from Egypt was unprecedented. He had
found himself immediately applied to by all parties, and had been
entrusted with all their secrets. There were three which were
particularly distinct; the _Manege_, of which General J. was one of the
leaders; the _Moderates_, directed by Sieyes; and the _Rotten_ party,
with Barras at their head.

The determination which Napoleon formed to ally himself with the
Moderates, exposed him, he said, to great danger. With the Jacobins he
would have risked nothing; they offered to name him Dictator. “But,
after conquering with them,” observed the Emperor, “it would have been
necessary, almost immediately, to conquer against them. A club cannot
endure a permanent chief; it wants one for every successive passion. Now
to make use of a party one day, in order to attack it the next, under
whatever pretext it is done, is still a piece of treachery; it was
inconsistent with my principles.”

“My dear Sir,” said the Emperor to me, at another moment, after having
again run over the events of the 18th of Brumaire, "that is a far
different thing, you will allow, from the conspiracy of St. Real, in
which there is much more plotting, and much less result; ours was struck
at a single blow. It is certain that there never was a great revolution
which caused less inconvenience; it was so generally desired; it was
accordingly crowned with universal applause.

"For my own part, all my share in the plot, for effecting this change,
was confined to the assembling the whole crowd of my visitors at the
same hour in the morning, and marching at their head to seize on power.
It was from the threshold of my door, from the top of my own steps, and
without my friends having any previous knowledge of my intentions, that
I led them to this conquest; it was amidst the brilliant escort they
formed, their lively joy, and unanimous ardour, that I presented myself
at the bar of the ancients, to thank them for the Dictatorship with
which they invested me.

“Metaphysicians have disputed, and will long dispute, whether we did not
violate the laws, and whether we were not criminal; but these are mere
abstractions, at best fit for books and tribunes, and which ought to
disappear before imperative necessity: one might as well blame a sailor
for waste and destruction, when he cuts away his masts to avoid being
upset. The fact is that, had it not been for us the country must have
been lost: and we saved it. The authors and chief agents of that
memorable state transaction may and ought, instead of attempting denials
or justifications, to answer their accusers proudly, like the Roman, _We
protest that we have saved our country; come with us and return thanks
to the gods_.”

On the completion of the Revolution of the 18th Brumaire, three
provisional consuls were appointed; Napoleon, Sieyes, and Ducos. A
president was to be chosen, the moment was critical, and rendered the
General highly necessary; he accordingly seized the arm-chair, and his
two acolytes did not venture to dispute it with him. Besides, Ducos
declared himself that moment, once for all. The General alone could save
them, he said: and thenceforth he was of his opinion in every thing.
Sieyes was greatly mortified, but he was obliged to do the same.

Sieyes was a man of a very selfish disposition. On the first meeting of
the three Consuls in Council, and as soon as they were alone, Sieyes
went in a mysterious manner to the doors of the apartment, to see
whether any person was within hearing; then, returning to Napoleon, he
said to him with complacency, and in an under-tone, shewing him, at the
same time, a sort of cabinet. “Do you see that pretty piece of
furniture? You do not, perhaps, suspect how valuable it is?” Napoleon
thought he was directing his attention to some appendage of the crown,
which had, perhaps, been used by Louis XVI. “That is not the matter;"
said Sieyes, seeing his mistake, “I am going to let you into the secret;
it contains 800,000 francs!” and his eyes opened wide. “In our
Directorial magistracy, we reflected that a Director going out of office
might very possibly go back to his family without a denier; a very
unbecoming thing: we therefore invented this little chest from which we
drew a sum for every Director going out of office. There are now no more
Directors; we are therefore the possessors of the remainder. What shall
we do with it?” Napoleon, who had paid great attention, and began, at
length, to understand, said: “If it comes to my knowledge, the sum shall
go to the public treasury; but if I should not hear of it (and I know
nothing of it yet), you and Ducos, being two old Directors, can divide
it between you: only make haste, for to-morrow it may perhaps, be too
late. The colleagues did not wait to be told twice,” observed the
Emperor. "Sieyes hastily undertook the operation, and divided the spoil
like the lion in the fable. He made several lots; he took one as the
eldest Director; another, because he was to have continued in office
longer than his colleague; a third, because he had suggested the idea of
this happy change, &c. In short he adjudged 600,000 francs to himself,
and only sent 200,000 to poor Ducos, who, when his first emotions had
subsided, insisted on revising this calculation, and seemed bent on
quarrelling with Sieyes. Both of them reverted to the subject every
moment, wishing their third colleague to arbitrate between them; but the
latter always replied—Settle it between yourselves. Above all, be quiet,
for if the matter should come to my ears, you would have to give up the
whole.

“When we were about to fix on a constitution,” said the Emperor, “Sieyes
treated us with another very entertaining scene. Circumstances and
public opinion had made him a sort of oracle in these matters; he
accordingly unfolded his various propositions in the committees of the
two councils, with great mystery, importance and method; they were all
adopted, good, bad, and indifferent. Finally, he crowned the work by
displaying the upshot which had been expected with lively and anxious
impatience: he proposed a Grand Elector, who was to reside at
Versailles, to enjoy six millions per annum, to represent the national
dignity, and to have no other duty than the nomination of two Consuls,
one for peace and the other for war; entirely independent in their
functions. Moreover, if this Elector should make a bad choice, the
Senate was to _absorb_ him himself. This was the technical expression,
meaning, to remove him, by replacing him, as a punishment, in the crowd
of private citizens.”

Napoleon, for want of experience in assemblies, and also through a
degree of circumspection which the circumstances of the moment required,
had taken little or no share in what had preceded; but now, at this
decisive point, he began, he said, to laugh in Sieyes’s face, and to cut
up all his metaphysical nonsense without mercy. Sieyes did not like to
defend himself, said the Emperor, nor did he know how to do it. He made
the attempt, however, saying that, after all, a king was nothing more.
Napoleon replied, “But you take the abuse for the principle, the shadow
for the body. And how can you imagine, M. Sieyes, that a man of any
talent or the least honour, will make up his mind to act the part of a
pig fattening on a few millions?” After this sally, which, said the
Emperor, made those who were present laugh immoderately, Sieyes remained
overwhelmed; it was no longer in his power to resume the subject of his
Grand Elector; and a First Consul was determined on, who was to have the
supreme decision and the nomination of all offices: with two accessory
Consuls, who were to have deliberate voices only. It was in fact, from
that moment, a unity of power. The First Consul was precisely the
President of America, veiled under the forms which the irritable spirit
of the times still rendered necessary. The Emperor accordingly said that
his reign began in reality from that day.

The Emperor in some measure regretted that Sieyes had not been nominated
one of the consuls. Sieyes, who at first refused the appointment,
afterwards regretted it himself, but not until it was too late. “He had
fallen into a mistake respecting the nature of these Consuls,” said
Napoleon; “he was fearful of mortification, and of having the First
Consul to contend with at every step; which would have been the case, if
all the Consuls had been equal; we should then have all been enemies:
but, the constitution having made them subordinate, there was no room
for the struggles of obstinacy, no cause of enmity, but a thousand
reasons for a genuine unanimity. Sieyes discovered this, but too late.”
The Emperor said he might have been very useful in council—better,
perhaps, than the others, because he had occasionally novel and most
luminous ideas; but that, in other respects, he was wholly unfit to
govern. “After all,” said the Emperor, “in order to govern it is
necessary to be a military man; one can only rule in boots and spurs.
Sieyes, without being fearful, was always in fear; his police spies
disturbed his rest.”

At the Luxembourg, during the provisional consulate, he often awakened
his colleague Napoleon, and harassed him about the new plots which he
heard of every moment from his private police. “But have they corrupted
our guard?” Napoleon used to say. “No.” “Then go to bed.—In war, as in
love, my dear Sir, we must come to close quarters to conclude matters.
It will be time enough to be alarmed when our 600 men are attacked.”

The Emperor said that, for the permanent government, he had chosen, in
Cambacérès and Lebrun, two distinguished characters; both prudent,
moderate, and able, but of completely opposite principles—the one the
advocate of abuses, prejudices, old institutions, the revival of honours
and distinctions, &c.—the other cold, austere, insensible, contending
against all these ideas, yielding to them without illusion, and
naturally falling into ideology.

In resuming, he observed that Sieyes might perhaps have contributed to
give a different colour, another characteristic, to the imperial
administration; but it was observed to him that this variation could not
have been otherwise than injurious, for Napoleon’s choice had been much
approved of at the time. The men he had selected, it was said, were not
liable to be objected to by Europe. They had greatly contributed to
conciliate public opinion in France, which ran wholly against Sieyes.
His name and the recollections attending it would, in the eyes of many
people, have disgraced the acts in which he might have taken part; and
there was an anecdote eagerly repeated at the time, which shews all the
ill-will that was borne towards him. It was said that, whilst he was
talking with the Emperor, at the Tuileries, about Louis XIV. he had
suffered the word _tyrant_ to escape him. "M. l’Abbé," the Emperor was
said to have replied, “if Louis XVI. had been a tyrant, you would now be
saying mass, and I should not be here.” The Emperor smiled at this
anecdote, without confirming or denying it. It will hereafter appear
that it was false.

               FRESH AGGRAVATIONS FROM THE GOVERNOR.—HIS
                              ABSURDITIES.

Saturday 6th to Monday 8th.—I have not mentioned the Governor for some
time. We endeavour to keep him as much as possible out of our thoughts;
we now scarcely ever adverted to him. His ill-manners, and the vexations
we endure from him oblige me to notice him to-day: they seem to have
increased. He has just withheld from us some letters from Europe,
although they came open, and in the most ostensible manner—merely
because they had not passed through the hands of the Secretary of State;
without considering that a want of formality can easily be rectified in
England, but that it is irremediable at a distance of two thousand
leagues. If, however, in thus rigorously and literally fulfilling his
instructions, he had only had the humanity to let us know that he has
received these letters, and from whom they come, he might set our minds
at ease with regard to those respecting whose health, or whose attention
to ourselves, we suffer so much anxiety: but he has the barbarity to
make a mystery of the affair. It is not many days since, the Countess
Bertrand having written to town, he had the note seized, and sent it
back to her as having been written without his permission. He
accompanied this insult with an official letter, by which he prohibited
us, for the future, from all written or even verbal communication with
the inhabitants, without submitting it to his approbation; and what is
particularly absurd and incredible is, that he imposed this restriction
on our intercourse with people whom he nevertheless permits us to visit
at our own pleasure. He accompanied the publication of the act relating
to us with commentaries which spread terror amongst the inhabitants; he
complains of the excessive expense of the Emperor’s table, and insists
on great reductions.—It had not been understood that General Bonaparte
would have so many people about him. Ministers, he told us ingenuously,
had never doubted that the permission they had sent us to go away would
have induced us to quit the Emperor. All this shuffling produced an
exchange of pretty sharp notes. To one of the Governor’s communications,
in which he said, that if the restrictions imposed on us seemed too
hard, we might relieve ourselves from them by going away, the Emperor
himself dictated the following addition to the answer we had already
written:—"That, having been honoured by him during his prosperity, we
considered it our chief pleasure to serve him, now that he could do
nothing for us; and if there were persons to whom this conduct was
incomprehensible, so much the worse for them."

NEW VEXATIONS.—THE EMPEROR SELDOM STIRS OUT.—TRISTAN.—LA FONTAINE’S
  FABLES.—THE BELLY RULES THE WORLD.—DIFFICULTY OF JUDGING OF MEN.

Tuesday 9th to Thursday 11th.—The Governor continues to annoy us, and is
incessantly aggravating the misery of our situation. He seems resolved
to place us in close confinement. He has published a proclamation in the
town, ordering that all letters and notes addressed by us to the
inhabitants, on any occasion whatever, shall be sent to him within
twenty-four hours. He has also forbidden them to visit the Grand Marshal
and his wife, who live at the entrance of our enclosure. In the
beginning of this blockade of Madame Bertrand, it was so rigorously
enforced that some medicines sent hence by the doctor for one of the
Grand Marshal’s people, who was dying, could not be delivered; and it
was only as an accommodation that the officer at last took upon him to
let them pass over the wall.

The Governor, having read in a letter, sent by one of us to Europe, that
the writer wanted several articles of clothing, linen, &c., came and
told him that he might have most of those articles out of the stores
sent by Government for Napoleon: and the individual replying that he
preferred purchasing them, being unwilling to incur any obligation, the
Governor drily answered that he might pay for them if he had a fancy to
do so. To which the other replied, “Excuse me, Sir, I like to choose my
shops myself.” In consequence of this, the Governor afterwards sent him
word, by the Doctor, that he should complain of him, for having
_contemptuously_ refused the gifts of Government. The other instantly
replied that he should be much obliged to him; being much happier to
give him an opportunity of transmitting refusals than requests, to the
ministers he served.

All these petty tricks, the length and interest of our readings, and the
continuance of the bad weather, which is dreadful, confine the Emperor
more closely than ever to the house, and overwhelm him with melancholy:
he now never stirs abroad. His amusement is now limited to going
occasionally, about five o’clock, to visit Madame de Montholon, who has
not yet gone abroad since her lying-in. We all meet there, and the
Emperor converses for half an hour, or three-quarters, before he returns
to his own apartment.

To-day he met little Tristan, the eldest son of M. de Montholon, who is
only seven or eight years old, and runs about all day. The Emperor
placed him between his knees, and tried to make him recite some fables,
of which the poor child did not understand two words out of ten. The
Emperor laughed heartily, blaming the practice of putting La Fontaine
into the hands of children who cannot understand him; and began to
explain these fables to Tristan; endeavouring to render their meaning
more palpable to him; nor could any thing be more curious than the
simplicity, justice, and logic of his illustrations.

Whilst he was explaining the fable of the Wolf and the Lamb, it was
extremely laughable to hear the poor child say _Sire_, and _your
Majesty_, and in speaking of the wolf, and to the Emperor, confuse all
his expressions; whilst his ideas were probably in still greater
confusion.

The Emperor thought this fable had far too much irony in it to be within
the comprehension of children. It was likewise defective, he observed,
in its principle and its moral; and this was the first time that he had
been struck with these defects. It was false that the argument of the
stronger was always the best; and if it sometimes happened so, in fact,
that, he said, was the very evil, the abuse, which was to be condemned.
The wolf, ought, therefore, to have been strangled in devouring the
lamb.

Tristan is very idle. He confessed to the Emperor that he did not work
every day. “Do you not eat every day?” said the Emperor to him, “Yes,
Sire.” “Well, then, you ought to work every day; no one should eat who
does not work.” “Oh! if that be the case, I will work every day,” said
the child, quickly. “Such is the influence of the belly,” said the
Emperor, patting that of little Tristan. "It is hunger that makes the
world move. Come, my little man, if you are a good boy, we’ll make a
page of you." "But I won’t be one," said Tristan, pouting and looking
sulky.

Our afternoons were occupied in reading something selected in hopes of
enabling us to kill time for an hour or two. At this period we were
reading a voyage to Spitzbergen; the shipwreck of the Dutch at Nova
Zembla; the _Causes celébres_, the trial of Calas; those of Martinguerre
and the Marchioness of Brinvilliers. The author observed, in some part
of the work, that the face often gave a false idea of the character. The
Emperor paused, laid down the book, and said, with a look and tone that
denoted conviction: “It is most true, and it is also true that no study
will enable us to avoid this deception. How many proofs of this kind
have I had! For instance, I had a person about me; his countenance
undoubtedly.... But after all he had a mischievous eye; I ought to have
guessed something from that.” He then went into some particulars of the
character of the person in question. They had known each other from
infancy, he said; he had long placed his entire confidence in this
individual, who had talent and resources; the Emperor even thought that
he had been attached and faithful—"But he was much too covetous," said
he, “he was too fond of money. When I was dictating to him, and he
sometimes had to write _millions_, it was never without a peculiar
change of countenance, a smacking of his lips, and restlessness on his
chair, which several times induced me to ask what ailed him.”

The Emperor said this vice was too glaring to allow of his retaining
this person about him; but that, considering his other qualities, he
ought, perhaps, to have contented himself with removing him into a
different situation.

THE IRON MASK, &C.—INGENIOUS FICTION.

Friday, 12th.—The conversation to-day led us to speak of the Iron Mask,
and we took a review of what has been said on the subject by Voltaire,
Dutens, and others; and of what is found respecting him in Richelieu’s
Memoirs. In these it is well known that he is said to have been the
twin-brother of Louis XIV., and the elder of the two. On this occasion,
some one added that, being employed in making out a pedigree, a person
had come to him to demonstrate seriously to him that Napoleon was a
lineal descendant from this Iron Mask, and consequently the legitimate
heir of Louis XIII. and Henry IV., in preference to Louis XIV. and all
his issue. The Emperor also said that he had heard something about it,
and added that the credulity of mankind and their love of the marvellous
are so great that it would not have been difficult to make out and
substantiate something of the kind for the multitude, and that there
would not have been wanting certain persons in the Senate to sanction
it; probably, he observed, the very men who at a later period were so
eager to revile him, as soon as they saw him in adversity.

We then went on to trace the foundation and the progress of this story.
The name of the Governor of the Island of St. Marguerite, to whom the
custody of the Iron Mask was entrusted, was M. de Bonpart, a
circumstance, to begin with, very singular. This man, it was asserted,
was aware of the origin of his prisoner. He had a daughter: she and the
prisoner were both young; they saw each other and loved. The Governor,
having informed the Court of this circumstance, it was decided that
there was no great objection to allowing the unfortunate captive to seek
in love an alleviation of his misery, and they were married.

The person who was speaking at this moment said that, at the time the
above particulars were related to him, he had been very much entertained
by them, and had happened to say that he thought the story very
ingeniously imagined; upon which the narrator of it became excessively
angry, maintaining that the marriage could very easily be verified by
the registers of one of the parishes of Marseilles, which he named. He
added that the children born of this marriage were silently and secretly
conveyed to Corsica, where the difference of language, chance, or
perhaps intention had, changed the name of Bonpart into Bonaparte and
Buonaparte, which, after all, has the same meaning, and is in fact the
same thing.

After this anecdote, it was added that, at the time of the revolution, a
similar story had been made in favour of the Orleans branch. It was
founded in a document found in the Bastille, and surmised that Anne of
Austria, who was brought to bed after twenty-three years of sterility,
had been delivered of a girl, and that Louis XIII. fearing she might
have no more children, had been induced to put away that girl and
falsely to substitute in her stead a boy, which was Louis XIV.; that the
following year, however, the Queen had been again brought to bed, and
this time really of a boy, which boy was Philip, the head of the house
of Orleans, who thus turned out to be with his descendants the
legitimate heirs to the throne, whilst Louis XIV. and his issue were
only intruders and usurpers. According to that story the Iron Mask was a
girl. A pamphlet on this subject was circulated in the provinces at the
time the Bastille was taken, but the story did not gain credit, and very
quietly disappeared, without having, it seems, engaged the attention of
the capital even for a moment.

JUNOT, HIS WIFE, &C.

Saturday, 13th.—The conversation again fell upon Junot. Of the
considerable fortunes which the Emperor had bestowed, that of Junot, he
said, was one of the most extravagant. The sums he had given him almost
exceeded belief, and yet he was always in debt; he had squandered
treasures, without credit to himself, without discernment or taste, and,
too frequently, the Emperor added, in gross debauchery.

He has been known more than once, after having taken a most copious and
substantial breakfast, in his magnificent _hotel_ at Paris, fired with
anger at the most trifling demand made by the most insignificant
creditor, to threaten to pay the debt with his sword. Every time he saw
the Emperor, said Napoleon, it was to hint at some fresh embarrassment,
be reprimanded and assisted. In the campaign of Austerlitz, he came to
the Emperor at Schönbrun; but this time, said Napoleon, it was not to
intercede precisely for himself. He took at this period a most lively
interest in the beautiful Madame Recamier. He had just arrived from
Paris, and began his conversation with the Emperor by a most virulent
philippic against M. de Marbois, then Minister of the Treasury, who had
been base enough, he said, to refuse M. Recamier a loan of only two
millions, to save him from bankruptcy. All Paris was indignant. This
Marbois, he added, was a wicked man, an unworthy servant, who did not
love the Emperor. He, Junot, had gone to him and had used every
endeavour to persuade him, but to no purpose. He had represented to him
the enormity of his conduct, and had assured him (and such added Junot
was the general opinion in Paris,) that if the Emperor had been in the
capital he would have immediately ordered the money to be given to M.
Recamier. “He was on a wrong scent,” said the Emperor, "for I coolly
replied to this passionate lover who was almost out of his senses: ‘You
and Paris are both mistaken, I should not have ordered even two thousand
_sous_ to be given; and I should have been very much displeased with De
Marbois if he had acted otherwise than he has done. _I_ am not Madame
Recamier’s lover, and I do not come forward to the assistance of
merchants who keep up an establishment of six hundred thousands francs
per annum. Know that, M. Junot, and learn also that the Treasury does
not lend money to those whom it knows to have been long since on the
road to bankruptcy; it has other claims to satisfy.’ Junot," added the
Emperor, “was obliged to calm his emotion, thinking probably that there
were hard-hearted people at Vienna as well as at Paris.”

Junot travelled as fast as the Emperor himself; he had his relays, said
Napoleon, hundreds of horses, and other extravagances of the kind.

The Emperor added that, not so much in his capacity as sovereign, but as
being fond of Junot, and actuated also by a sort of feeling derived from
the similarity of birth-place, he being also originally from Corsica, he
had one day sent for Madame Junot, in order to give her some paternal
admonitions on the subject of the extravagance of her husband’s
expenditure, the profusion of diamonds which she herself had
inconsiderately displayed after her return from Portugal, and her
intimate connections with a certain foreigner, which might give umbrage
in a political point of view. But she rejected this advice, dictated
alone by concern for her interest. “She grew angry,” said the Emperor,
“and treated me like a child; nothing then remained for me to do but to
send her about her business, and abandon her to her fate. She fancied
herself a princess of the family of the Comnenes; and Junot had been
made to believe it when he was induced to marry her. Her family was from
Corsica, and resided in the neighbourhood of mine; they were under great
obligations to my mother, not merely for her benevolence towards them,
but for services of a more positive nature.” The Emperor then gave the
following explanation:

"The Genoese, in evacuating the Morea, had formerly carried a colony of
Maniotes to Corsica and settled them in the neighbourhood of Ajaccio. M.
de Vergennes, while he was ambassador at Constantinople, married a Greek
woman; and, on his return to France, being greatly in favour with Louis
XVI. he took it into his head that he must have married a princess. It
so happened that some political circumstances occurred to favour his
wish; the downfall of Constantinople was believed in at that moment, and
it would have suited France to advance some pretensions to a portion of
that empire. A man of the name of Comnene, a relation of Madame de
Vergennes, was therefore sent for from the Greek colony near Ajaccio,
and, having been brought to Versailles, was soon after, by virtue of
letters-patent of Louis XVI., acknowledged a descendant from the
Emperors of Constantinople. This said Comnene was a large farmer, whose
sister had unexpectedly married, some years before, a Frenchman, a clerk
in the victualling department named P—. After the elevation of the
family, and through the interest of M, de Vergennes, this P—, clerk in
the victualling department, had become a man of great consequence,
having had the contract for supplying the whole army of Rochambeau. The
daughter of the clerk was this very Madame Junot, duchess of Abrantes.

“Junot, in the campaign of Russia, gave me great cause of
dissatisfaction;” said the Emperor, “he was no longer the same man, and
committed some gross blunders which cost us dear.”

After the return from Moscow, Junot, in consequence of the
dissatisfaction he had given, lost the governorship of Paris; and the
Emperor sent him to Venice. However that species of disgrace was almost
immediately softened, by his appointment as Governor-general of Illyria;
but the blow was struck. The frequent incoherences which had been
observed in Junot’s behaviour for some time past, and which had arisen
from the excesses in which he had indulged, broke out at last into
complete insanity. It was necessary to secure him, and to convey him
home to his paternal mansion, where he died miserably shortly
afterwards, having mutilated his person with his own hands. . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

                MARSHAL LANNES.—MURAT AND HIS WIFE, &C.

Sunday, 14th.—During the dinner, speaking of dress, it was said that,
amongst the number of great personages of that time, none had carried
extravagance in that point further than Murat, and yet, some one
observed, his dress was for the most part so singular and fantastic that
the public called him King Franconi.[28]

Footnote 28:

  Director of a theatre at Paris, similar to Astley’s here.

The Emperor laughed very heartily, and confessed that certain costumes
and manners sometimes gave to Murat the appearance of a quack operator
or a mountebank. It was added that Bernadotte also took infinite pains
with his dress, and that Lannes bestowed much time upon his. The Emperor
expressed himself much surprised at what he had heard respecting the two
latter, and this led him to repeat how sincerely he regretted the loss
of Marshal Lannes. “Poor Lannes,” said he, "had passed the night which
preceded the battle, in Vienna, and not alone. He appeared on the field
without having taken any food, and fought the whole day. The physician
said that this triple concurrence of circumstances caused his death, he
required a great deal of strength after the wound to enable him to bear
it, and unfortunately nature was almost exhausted before.

“It is generally said,” the Emperor observed, “that there are certain
wounds, to which death seems preferable; but this is very seldom the
case, I assure you. It is at the moment we are going to part with
existence that we cling to it with all our might. Lannes, the most
courageous of men, deprived of both his legs, would not hear of death,
and was irritated to such a degree as to declare that the two surgeons
who attended him deserved to be hanged for behaving so brutally towards
a Marshal. He had unfortunately overheard them whisper to each other, as
they thought without being heard, that it was impossible he could
recover. Every moment the unfortunate Lannes called for the Emperor; he
twined himself round me,” said Napoleon, “with all he had left of life;
he would hear of no one but me, he thought but of me; it was a kind of
instinct! Undoubtedly he loved his wife and children better than me; yet
he did not speak of them: it was he that protected them, whilst I on the
contrary was his protector. I was for him something vague and undefined,
a superior being, his Providence, which he implored!”

Somebody then observed that the world had spoken very differently on the
subject; that it had been reported that Lannes had died like a maniac,
vociferating imprecations against the Emperor, at whom he seemed
enraged; and it was added that he had always an aversion to the Emperor,
and had often manifested it to him with insolence. “What an absurdity,”
said the Emperor, “Lannes, on the contrary, adored me. He was assuredly
one of the men on whom I could most implicitly rely. It is very true
that, in the impetuosity of his disposition, he has sometimes suffered
some hasty expressions against me to escape his lips, but he would
probably have broken the head of any person who had chanced to hear
them.”

Returning to Murat, some one observed that he had greatly influenced the
unfortunate events of 1814. “He determined them,” said the Emperor, “he
is one of the principal causes of our being here. But the fault is
originally mine. There were several men whom I had made too great; I had
raised them above the sphere of their intelligence. I was reading, some
days since, his proclamation on abandoning the Viceroy, which I had not
seen before. It is difficult to conceive any thing disgraced by a
greater degree of turpitude: he says in that document that the moment is
come to choose between two banners, that of crime and that of virtue. It
is my banner which he calls the banner of crime! and it is Murat, my
creature, the husband of my sister, the man who owed every thing to me,
who would have been nothing without me, who exists by me, and is known
through me alone—it is Murat who writes this! It is impossible to desert
the cause of misfortune with more unfeeling brutality; and to run with
more unblushing baseness to hail a new destiny.”

From that moment, Madame (mother of the Emperor) refused to have any
thing more to do with either Murat or his wife; to all their entreaties
she invariably answered that she held traitors and treachery in
abhorrence. As soon as she was at Rome, after the disasters of 1814,
Murat hastened to send her eight magnificent horses out of his stables
at Naples; but Madame would not accept them. She resisted, in like
manner, every effort of her daughter Caroline, who constantly repeated
that, after all, the fault was not hers; that she had no share in it;
that she could not command her husband. But Madame answered, like
Clytemnestra—"If you could not command him, you ought at least to have
opposed him:—but what struggles have you made? what blood has flowed? At
the expense of your own life, you ought to have defended your brother,
your benefactor, your master, against the sanguinary attempts of your
husband.

“On my return from Elba,” said the Emperor, "Murat’s head was turned, on
hearing that I had landed in France. The first intelligence he received
of this event informed him that I was at Lyons. He was accustomed to my
great returns of fortune; he had more than once seen me placed in most
extraordinary circumstances. On this occasion, he thought me already
master of all Europe, and determined to endeavour to wrest Italy from
me; for that was his object, the aim of all his hopes. It was in vain
that some men, of the greatest influence amongst the nations which he
attempted to excite to rebellion, threw themselves at his feet and
assured him that he was mistaken; that the Italians had a king on whom
alone they had bestowed their love and their esteem. Nothing could stop
him; he ruined himself, and contributed to ruin us a second time; for
Austria, supposing that he was acting at my instigation, would not
believe my professions, and mistrusted me. Murat’s unfortunate end
corresponds with his conduct. Murat was endowed with extraordinary
courage and little intelligence. The too great disproportion between
those two qualities explains the man entirely. It was difficult, even
impossible, to be more courageous than Murat and Lannes; but Murat had
remained courageous and nothing more. The mind of Lannes, on the
contrary, had risen to the level of his courage; he had become a giant.
However," said the Emperor, in ending the conversation, “the execution
of Murat is nevertheless horrible. It is an event in the history of the
morals of Europe; an infraction of the rules of public decorum.—A king
has caused another king, acknowledged by all the others, to be shot!
What a spell he has broken!” . . . . . . . . .




                     SUMMARY OF THE THREE MONTHS OF
                         APRIL, MAY, AND JUNE.


I have already observed that, in a work like the present, it is
impossible to keep up in any point a unity of interest and of object; I
shall, therefore, now attempt to supply this defect by retracing, in a
very few words, and uninterruptedly, the circumstances of aggravation
which have occurred in the Emperor’s situation during these three
months; the repeated instances of ill-treatment to which he has been
subjected; the visible decline of his health; the general tenor of his
habits; the principal topics of his conversation:—in a word, the
bulletin, both physical and moral, of his person, during that short
space of time.

1st. A new Governor arrives, who turns out to be a man of either very
narrow views, or very bad intentions—a corporal with his watch-word,
instead of a general with his instructions.

2dly. A declaration is required from every one of the captives that he
submits beforehand to all the restrictions that may be imposed on
Napoleon, and this in the hopes of detaching them from his person.

3dly. An official communication is made to us of the convention of the
allied Sovereigns, who, without further ceremony, proclaim and sanction
the banishment of Napoleon.

4thly. We receive the bill of the British Parliament, which converts
into a law the act of oppression of the English ministers towards the
person of Napoleon.

5thly. Lastly, Commissioners come in the name of their Sovereigns, to
watch over the fetters, and contemplate the sufferings of the victim.
Thus our horizon grows darker and darker, our chains are shortened, all
hopes of amelioration vanish, and the most gloomy prospects are all that
the future presents.

The arrival of the new Governor is the signal for the infliction of
greater hardships. For the person of the Emperor it is the commencement
of a new series of torments; every day he is wounded by the recurrence
of some petty vexation.

The first step of Sir Hudson Lowe is an insult; his first word one of
cruelty; one of his first acts, an act of inhumanity.

After that, he seems to have no other occupation, to have received no
other instruction, than to torment us and make us suffer under every
shape, on every occasion, and in every way.

The Emperor, who had at first resolved to adopt a system of strict
stoicism, is nevertheless moved with indignation at this conduct, and
expresses himself in strong terms. Conversations grow warm; the breach
is made; it will grow wider every day.

The Emperor’s health is visibly affected, and we can observe a rapid
alteration. Contrary to his natural temperament, he very frequently
feels indisposed; on one occasion he is confined to his room for six
days running, without going out at all. A secret melancholy, which
endeavours to conceal itself from every eye, and perhaps from his own,
begins to take possession of him; the latent seeds of disease appear
already to be lurking in his system. He contracts every day the circle,
already so confined, of his movements and his diversions. He gives up
riding on horseback; he no longer invites any English to dinner,—he even
abandons his daily occupations. The dictations in which he had hitherto
seemed to take pleasure, are suspended. Disgust had seized him, he would
sometimes say to me, and he could not muster courage enough to resume
them. The greatest part of his days is passed in turning over books in
his own apartment, or in conversing with us either publicly or in
private; and in the evening, after dinner, he reads to us some plays of
our great poets, or any other work which chance or the choice of the
moment brings to his hand.

Yet the serenity of his mind, the equanimity of his disposition towards
us, are not in the least impaired; on the contrary, we seem more united
like one family. He is more ours, and we belong more to him; his
conversations offer a greater degree of confidence, freedom, and
interest.

He would now often send for me into his room, to converse with him; and
these private conversations would sometimes lead him to subjects of
great importance,—such as the war in Russia, that of Spain, the
conferences of Tilsit and Erfurth, which will be found in this portion
of my Memoirs.

                            END OF VOL. II.

            ANDOVER: STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY B. BENSLEY.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               Footnotes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Transcriber’s Note

Certain conventions of the text have been modified. For instance, a
series of dots (....) were employed where a name was elided. These have
been replaced with long dashes (———) in order to avoid awkward line
breaks.

Given the publication date, spelling has been generally allowed to stand
as printed. But errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been
corrected, and are noted here.

There were a number of instances in the text where quoted words were
missing either an opening or closing quotation mark. The proper
placement is not always obvious, but the most plausible choice has been
made. The paragraph beginning at the foot of p. 294 was particularly
obscure and has been left to the reader to decipher.

The issues tabulated below should be noted, along with the resolutions.
The references below are to the page and line in the original.

  9.26     the glory and prosperity of their [‘/,]        Inverted.
  9.40     my establis[h]ment on the throne               Added.
  21.32    you were attending the birth of a cob[b]ler’s  Added.
           son.
  30.13    they had been greatly deceived on [t]his       Added.
           point.
  36.33    leading in very different d[i]rections.        Added.
  45.40    [“]I shall keep this and give you mine         Added.
  55.15    We wanted all this, and, ther[e]fore], in      Added.
           spite of
  55.17    plunged into confusion and t[mulu/umul]t       Transposed.
  55.36    and said, [“]You see his best friends          Added.
  62.21    the leading star of the nations....[”]         Added.
  63.4     said the Emperor, “[h]e decided the fate of    Added.
           France
  67.17    he did not spare him[.]                        Added.
  68.19    “Sire,” said he at length, [“]a circumstance   Added.
           occurred to me
  80.31    "Art. V.[—]His Majesty the King                Added.
  89.7     an aide-de-camp is the best man that can be    Added.
           chosen[.]
  90.20    [“/‘]You will see that they will hold          Replaced.
  90.22    detained me to-day.[’]”                        Added.
  101.13   Abb[e/é] de Pradt," continued the Emperor      Replaced.
  105.33   [“]Talleyrand, perhaps, might have done this:  Added.
  106.16   How many arra[n]gements should I not have      Added.
           proposed!
  108.20   [“]If all this be attributed                   Added.
  120.30   It can be proved [t]hat this was merely the    Restored.
           result
  131.11   Here I committed an error,[”] said the         Added.
           Emperor,
  131.12   [“]which the more unpardonable                 Added.
  133.28   [“/‘]We are placing,[”/’]                      Replaced
  133.29   said they, [“/‘]an Italian                     Replaced.
  133.31   on the Gauls.[’”]                              Added.
  136.10   I placed one [one] of my brothers at their     Removed.
           head
  137.25   the period in which he flourished.[”]          Added.
  149.23   [“/‘]You had better have taken his life, I     Replaced.
           should
  149.26   me to console him in his misery.[’]            Added.
  167.38   ‘M. L[a/e] Sage,’ said he,                     Replaced.
  168.4    a considerable time afterwar[d]s               Added.
  172.41   [“]There have been published                   Added.
  174.27   two millions[,] worth of copies                Removed.
  180.28   till half-past eight o’clock[,/.]              Replaced.
  199.16   [“]I was provoked to the utmost extreme        Added.
  226.2    the Duke [D/d]’Enghien,                        Replaced.
  231.19   on the part of the First Co[u]nsul to M. de    Removed.
           Chateaubriand
  241.10   your duties, submission, and dependance,       Added.
           &c.[”]
  267.37   [“]Two of the generals,                        Added.
  270.22   [“]But this proved for me," said the Emperor   Added.
  276.30   who amused himself with calcu[l]ating          Added.
  281.15   complete liberty of universal exchange.[”]     Added.
  285.24   Brissot, Condorcet, Vergn[i]aud>, Gaudet       Added.
  288.1    All thos[e], in the higher classes of society  Added.
  300.38   acts of vileness have reduced France[’] in the Removed.
           eyes
  303.38   the _corps [d]’armée_                          Added.
  315.22   said[,] “I found it a very difficult thing     Added.
  316.8    “Six, Sire.” [“]How the plague can that be?”   Added.
  317.7    “Well,[”] said he                              Added.
  317.13   I can bet[t]er employ the leisure              Added.
  318.4    the Emperor’s place on an eleva[va]tion of one Removed.
           or two steps.
  326.3    a discussion once arose respec[t]ing the plan  Added.
           of a decree
  334.29   19th.—To[ /-]day the Northumberland sailed     Added.
  354.5    in all the instruments and access[a/o]ries of  Replaced.
           war.
  382.21   [“]That is not the matter;”                    Added.
  385.6    he had chosen, in Cambac[èré/érè]s and Lebrun, Transposed.
  387.16   of this blockade of Madame Bert[r]and          Added.
  397.26   [“]However,” said the Emperor                  Removed.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE, EXILE, AND CONVERSATIONS OF THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON. (VOL. II) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

------
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Memoirs of the life, exile, and conversations of the Emperor Napoleon. (Vol. III)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Memoirs of the life, exile, and conversations of the Emperor Napoleon. (Vol. III)

Author: comte de Emmanuel-Auguste-Dieudonné Las Cases


        
Release date: January 16, 2017 [eBook #53969]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53969

Credits: Produced by KD Weeks, Josep Cols Canals and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE, EXILE, AND CONVERSATIONS OF THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON. (VOL. III) ***

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_. Abbreviations
using superscripted letters are indicated using ‘^’ as Mess^{rs}.

Footnotes have been moved to follow the paragraphs in which they are
referenced.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

This is the third of four volumes, which can be found at Project
Gutenberg here:

   Volume I        https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53967
   Volume II       https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53968
   Volume III      https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53969
   Volume IV       https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53970

[Illustration:

  SIR HUDSON LOWE.

  _Published for Henry Colburn, March 1836._
]




                                MEMOIRS
                                   OF
                            THE LIFE, EXILE,
                                  AND
                             CONVERSATIONS,
                                 OF THE
                           EMPEROR NAPOLEON.

                                   BY
                        THE COUNT DE LAS CASES.


                             A NEW EDITION.


                             WITH PORTRAITS
                   AND NUMEROUS OTHER EMBELLISHMENTS.

                               VOL. III.


                                LONDON:
                      PUBLISHED FOR HENRY COLBURN,
 BY RICHARD BENTLEY; BELL AND BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH; J. CUMMING, DUBLIN;
                          AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.

                                -------

                               DCCCXXXVI.




            ANDOVER: STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY B. BENSLEY.




                                MEMOIRS

                                   OF

                         THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON.

                                -------

            THE BILL RESPECTING OUR EXILE.—BEAUMARCHAIS.—THE
                          WORKS OF CHERBOURG.

July 15, 1816. About ten o’clock, the Emperor entered my apartment: he
came unawares, as he wished to take a walk. I followed him, and he
walked for some time towards the wood, where we were taken up by the
calash. A considerable interval had elapsed since he made use of it. I
was the only person with him, and the Bill, which related to him, and
with the nature of which we were unacquainted, was, during the whole
time, the subject of our conversation.

Upon our return, the Emperor, after some hesitation whether he should
breakfast under the trees, determined to go in, and remained at home the
whole of the day. He dined alone.

He sent for me after dinner; I found him engaged in reading some
_Mercures_ or old newspapers. He found in them various anecdotes and
circumstances respecting Beaumarchais, whom the Emperor, during his
Consulate, had, notwithstanding all his wit, uniformly discountenanced,
on account of his bad character and his gross immorality. The difference
of manners imparted a poignancy to the anecdotes, although the
difference of times was so trifling. He found an account of Louis the
Sixteenth’s visit to Cherbourg, on which he dwelt for some time. He next
adverted to the works of Cherbourg, and took a rapid review of them,
with the clearness, precision, and lively manner that characterized
every thing he said.

Cherbourg is situated at the bottom of a semicircular bay, the two
extremities of which are the Pelée Island on the right, and Point
Querqueville on the left. The line, by which these two points are
connected, forms the chord or the diameter, and runs East and West.

Opposite to the North, and at a very small distance, about 20 leagues,
is the famous Portsmouth, the grand arsenal of the English. The
remainder of their coast runs nearly parallel opposite to ours. Nature
has done every thing for our rivals; nothing for us. Their shores are
safe and clear themselves daily from obstructions. They abound in deep
soundings, in the means of shelter, in harbours and excellent ports;
ours are, on the contrary, full of rocks, the water is shallow, and they
are every day choking up. We have not in these parts a single real port
of large dimensions, and it might be said that the English are, at the
same moment, both at home and on our coast, since it is not requisite
for their squadrons, at anchor in Portsmouth, to put to sea to molest
us. A few light vessels are sufficient to convey intelligence of our
movements, and, in an instant, without trouble or danger, they are ready
to pounce upon their prey.

If, on the contrary, our squadrons are daring enough to appear in the
British Channel, which ought, in reality, to be called the French Sea,
they are exposed to perpetual danger; their total destruction may be
effected by the hurricane or the superiority of the enemy, because in
both these cases there is no shelter for them. This is what happened at
the famous battle of La Hogue, where Tourville might have united the
glory of a skilful retreat with that of a hard fought and unequal
contest, had there been a port for him to take shelter in.

In this state of things, men of great sagacity and anxious for the
welfare of their country, prevailed upon government, by dint of projects
and memorials, to seek, by the assistance of art, those resources of
which we had been deprived by nature; and, after a great deal of
hesitation, the bay of Cherbourg was selected, and it was determined to
protect it by an immense dike, projecting into the sea. In that way we
were to acquire, even close to the enemy, an artificial road, whence our
ships might be able, in all times and in all weathers, to attack his, or
to escape his pursuit.

“It was,” said the Emperor, “a magnificent and glorious undertaking,
very difficult with respect to the execution and to the finances of that
period. The dike was to be formed by immense cones constructed empty in
the port and towed afterwards to the spot, where they were sunk by the
weight of the stones with which they were filled.[1] There certainly was
great ingenuity in the invention. Louis XVI. honoured these operations
with his presence. His departure from Versailles was a great event. In
those times, a king never left his residence, his excursions did not
extend beyond the limits of a hunting party; they did not hurry about as
at present, and I really believe that I contributed not a little to the
rapidity of their movements.

Footnote 1:

  The diameter of these cones, which were 60 feet high, was 104 feet at
  the base, and 60 at the top.

“However, as it was absolutely necessary that things should be impressed
with the character of the age, the eternal rivalry between the land and
sea, that question which can never be decided, continued to be carried
on. It might have been said in that respect, that there were two kings
in France, or that he who reigned had two interests, and ought to have
two wills, which proved rather that he had none at all. Here the sea was
the only subject for consideration, yet the question was decided in
favour of the land, not by superiority of argument, but by priority of
right. Where the fate of the empire was at stake, a point of precedence
was substituted, and thus the grand object, the magnificent enterprise,
failed of success. The land-party established itself at Pelée Island and
at fort Querqueville; it was employed there merely to lend an auxiliary
hand to the construction of the dike, which was itself the chief object;
but instead of that, it began by establishing its own predominance, and
afterwards compelled the dike to become the instrument of its
convenience, and subservient to its plans and discretion. What was the
result? The harbour, which was forming and which was intended to contain
the mass of our navy, whether designed to strike at the heart of the
enemy’s power, or to take occasional shelter, could only accommodate
fifteen sail at most, while we wanted anchorage for more than a hundred,
which might have been effected without more labour and with little more
expense, had the works been carried more forward into the sea, merely
beyond the limits which the land-party had appropriated to itself.

“Another blunder highly characteristic, and scarcely conceivable, took
place. All the principal measures for completing the harbour were fixed
upon; the dike commenced; one of the channels, that to the eastward,
finished, and the other to the westward was on the point of being
formed, without an exact and precise knowledge of all the soundings.
This oversight was so great that the channel already formed, that to the
eastward, five hundred fathoms broad, having been carried too close to
the fort, did not, without inconvenience, admit vessels at low water,
and that the other, which was about to be constructed to the westward,
would have been impracticable, or at least very dangerous, but for the
individual zeal of one officer (M. de Chavagnac), who made that
important discovery in time, and caused the works on the left extremity
of the dike to be stopped at the distance of twelve hundred fathoms from
fort Querqueville, by which it was to be defended. This seems to me, and
is, in fact, too great a distance.[2]

Footnote 2:

  It was not until 1789, five years after the commencement of these
  works, that orders were given by government for taking the soundings
  of the harbour and ascertaining the state of the bottom. Up to that
  time, the works had been carried on solely on vague and imperfect
  notions!! (Mémoire du Baron Cachin, Inspecteur Général des ponts et
  chaussées.)

“The system adopted in the works of the dike, which is more than a
league from the shore, and more than 1900 fathoms long by 90 feet broad,
was also subjected to numerous changes, suggested, however, by
experience. The cones, which, according to the established principle,
ought to have touched each other at their bases, were, in that respect,
either separated by accident or with a view to economy. They were
damaged by storms, eaten by worms, or rotted with age. They were at
length altogether neglected, with the exception of stones thrown at
random into the sea; and when it was observed that these were scattered
by the rolling of the waves, recourse was had to enormous blocks, which
finally answered every expectation.

“The works were continued, without interruption, under Louis XVI. An
encreased degree of activity was imparted to them by our legislative
assemblies; but in consequence of the commotions which soon followed,
they were completely abandoned, and at the time of the Consulate, not a
trace of that famous dike was to be seen. Every thing had been destroyed
for several feet under low water level, by the original imperfection of
the plan, by the length of time, and the violence of the waves.

“The moment, however, I took the helm of affairs, one of the first
things I did was to turn my attention to so important a point. I ordered
commissions of inquiry; I had the subject discussed in my presence; I
made myself acquainted with the local circumstances; and I decided that
the dike should be run up with all possible expedition, and that two
solid fortifications should, in the course of time, be constructed at
the two extremities; but that measures should be immediately taken for
the establishment of a considerable provisional battery. I had then to
encounter, on all sides, the inconveniencies, the objections, the
particular views, the fondness which attaches itself to individual
opinions, &c. Several maintained that the thing certainly could not be
done; I continued steady, I insisted, I commanded, and the thing was
done. In less than two years, a real island was seen rising as it were,
by magic, from the sea, on which was erected a battery of large calibre.
Until that moment, our labours had almost constantly been the sport of
the English; they had, they said, been convinced, from their origin,
that they would prove fruitless; they had foretold that the cones would
destroy themselves, that the small stones would be swept away by the
waves, and above all, they relied upon our lassitude and our
inconstancy. But here things were completely altered, and they made a
shew of molesting our operations; they were, however, too late; I was
already prepared for them. The western channel naturally continued very
wide, and the two extreme fortifications, which defended, each its
peculiar passage, being incapable of maintaining a cross-fire, it was
probable that an enterprising enemy might be enabled to force the
western channel, come to an anchor within the dike, and there renew the
disaster of Aboukir. But I had already guarded against this with my
central provisional battery. However, as I am for permanent
establishments, I ordered within the dike, in the centre, by way of
support, and which in its turn might serve as an envelope, an enormous
elliptical paté to be constructed, commanding the central battery, and
mounted itself in two casemated stories, bomb-proof, with 50 pieces of
large calibre and 20 mortars of an extensive range, as well as barracks,
powder-magazine, cistern, &c.

“I have the satisfaction of having left this noble work in a finished
state.

“Having provided for the defensive, my only business was to prepare
offensive measures, which consisted in the means of collecting the mass
of our fleets at Cherbourg. The harbour, however, could contain but
fifteen sail. For the purpose of increasing the number, I caused a new
port to be dug; the Romans never undertook a more important, a more
difficult task, or one which promised a more lasting duration! It was
sunk into the granite to the depth of 50 feet, and I caused the opening
of it to be celebrated by the presence of Maria Louisa, while I myself
was on the fields of battle in Saxony. By this means I procured
anchorage for 25 sail more. Still that number was not sufficient, and I
therefore relied upon very different means of augmenting my naval
strength. I was resolved to renew the wonders of Egypt at Cherbourg. I
had already erected my pyramid in the sea; I would also have my lake
Mœris. My great object was to be enabled to concentrate all our
maritime force, and in time, it would have been immense and adequate to
strike a fatal blow against the enemy. I was preparing my scene of
action in such a way, that the two nations, in their totality, might
have been enabled to grapple with each other, man to man, and the issue
could not be doubtful, for we should have been more than 40 millions of
French against 15 millions of English. I should have wound up the war,
with a battle of Actium, and afterwards what did I want of England? Her
destruction? Certainly not. I merely wanted the end of an intolerable
usurpation, the enjoyment of imprescriptible and sacred rights, the
deliverance, the liberty, of the seas, the independence, the honour, of
flags. I was speaking in the name of all and for all, and I should have
succeeded by concession or by force. I had, on my side, power,
indisputable right, the wishes of nations,” &c.

I have reasons for believing that the Emperor, disgusted with the losses
occasioned by partial attempts at sea, and enlightened by fatal
experience, had adopted a new system of maritime warfare.

The war between England and France had insensibly assumed the aspect of
a real struggle for life or death. The irritation of all the English
against Napoleon was raised to the highest degree. His Berlin and Milan
decrees, his continental system, and his offensive expressions, had
shocked all minds on the other side of the Channel; while the English
ministers, by their libels, fabrications, and all imaginable means, had
succeeded, by exciting every passion, in rendering the quarrel
altogether national. On this ground, it was declared in full Parliament,
that the war was _perpetual_, or at least for _life_. The Emperor
thought it his duty to shape his plans in conformity to that state of
things, and from that instant, as much from calculation as from
necessity, he gave up all kind of cruizing, distant enterprizes, and
hazardous attempts. He determined upon a strict defensive system, until
his continental affairs should be finally settled, and the accumulation
of his maritime force should allow him to strike, with certainty, at a
later period. He, therefore, retained the whole of his shipping in port,
and confined himself to the gradual augmentation of our naval resources,
without exposing them to any further risk. Every thing was calculated on
the basis of a remote result.

Our navy had lost a great number of vessels, the greatest part of our
good seamen were prisoners in England, and all our ports were blockaded
by the English, who obstructed their communications. The Emperor ordered
canals in Britanny, by means of which, and in spite of the enemy, points
of communication for providing Brest with all kinds of supplies were
established between Bordeaux, Rochefort, Nantes, Holland, Antwerp,
Cherbourg, and that port. He was desirous of having wet docks at
Flushing or in its neighbourhood, for the purpose of containing the
Antwerp squadron, completely equipped and ready to put to sea in
four-and-twenty hours, which was necessarily confined in the Scheldt
four or five months of the year. Finally, he projected near Boulogne, or
on some spot along that coast, the construction of a dike similar to
that of Cherbourg, and between Cherbourg and Brest, a suitable harbour
at the Ile-à-Bois. All this was planned, for the purpose of securing, at
all times and without danger, a full and free communication to our large
ships between Antwerp and Brest. To obviate the want of seamen, and the
great difficulty of forming them, it was ordered that the young
conscripts should be, every day, trained in all our ports. They were, at
first, to be put on board small light vessels, and a flotilla of that
kind was even to navigate the Zuiderzee; they were afterwards to be
turned over to large ships and immediately replaced by others of the
same class. The vessels were ordered to get under sail every day, to go
through every possible manœuvre and evolution, and even to exchange
shots with the enemy, without exposing themselves to the chance of an
engagement.

The last point was the force and number of our vessels; they were
considerable, notwithstanding all our losses, and the Emperor calculated
on being enabled to build 20 or 25 yearly. The crews would be ready as
fast as they were wanted, and thus, at the expiration of four or six
years, he could have relied upon having 200 sail of the line, and
perhaps 300, had that number been necessary, in less than 10 years. And
what was that period in comparison with the perpetual war, or the war
for life, which was declared against us? The affairs of the continent
would, in the mean time, be brought to a termination; the whole of it
would have embraced our system; the Emperor would have marched back the
greatest part of his troops to our coast, and it was in that situation
that he looked with confidence to a decisive issue of the contest. All
the respective resources of the two nations would have been called into
action, and we should then, in his opinion, subdue our enemies by moral
energy, or strangle them by our material strength.

The Emperor entertained several projects for the improvement of the
navy, and adapted to that end part of his military tactics. He intended
to establish his offensive and defensive line from Cape Finisterre to
the mouth of the Elbe. He was to have had three squadrons with admirals
commanding in chief, as he had corps d’armée with their generals in
chief. The Admiral of the centre was to establish his head quarters at
Cherbourg; of the left, at Brest; and of the right, at Antwerp. Smaller
divisions were to be stationed at the extremities, at Rochefort, and at
Ferrol, in the Texel, and at the mouth of the Elbe, for the purpose of
turning and outflanking the enemy. All these points were to be connected
by numerous intermediate stations, and their respective commanders in
chief were to be considered as constantly present, by the assistance of
telegraphs, which, lining the coast, were to preserve an uninterrupted
communication between the parts of the grand system.

Let us consider, however, what would have been the conduct of the
English during our preparations and the progressive increase of our
naval power. Would they have continued the blockade of our ports? We
should have had the satisfaction of witnessing the wear and tear of
their cruising squadrons; we should have compelled them to maintain 100
or 150 vessels constantly exposed on our coasts to the violence of
tempests, to the danger of rocks, to all the hazards of disaster, while
we, on the contrary, had every chance of success, should any unforeseen
catastrophe occur from natural events, or the faults of their admirals,
which could not fail to happen in the course of time. What advantages
should we not have derived from the event? We, fresh and in excellent
condition; we, waiting only for the opportunity, always ready to set
sail and engage! Should the English be tired out? Our vessels would
immediately put to sea for the purpose of exercising and training their
crews.

On the completion of our armaments and at the approach of the decisive
moment, were the English alarmed for the safety of their island, to
collect their strength in front of their principal arsenals, Plymouth,
Portsmouth, and the Thames, our three divisions of Brest, Cherbourg, and
Antwerp, would attack them, and our wings would turn then upon Ireland
and Scotland. Were they, relying upon their skill and bravery, resolved
to oppose us in one great body, then the struggle would be reduced to a
decisive issue, of which we should have been at liberty to choose the
_time_, the _place_, and the _opportunity_;—and this is what the Emperor
called the battle of Actium, in which, if we were defeated, we should
experience but simple losses, while, if we proved victorious, the enemy
would cease to exist. But our triumph, he maintained, was certain, for
the two nations would have to contend man to man, and we were upwards of
forty millions against fifteen. This was the favourite position on which
he uniformly dwelt. Such was one of his grand ideas, his gigantic
conceptions.

Napoleon has been the founder of so many establishments, that his works
and monuments are injurious to each other by their number, variety, and
importance. It was my earnest wish to have given a full relation of his
works, which were executed at Cherbourg, as well as of those which he
had projected. A person precisely of the profession best qualified to
appreciate the subject, and one of its brightest ornaments, has promised
me a description of them. Should he keep his word, it shall be given
hereafter.

            LONG AUDIENCE GIVEN TO THE GOVERNOR.—REMARKABLE
                             CONVERSATION.

16th.—About nine o’clock, the Emperor took an airing in the calash.
There was a vessel in sight, at which he looked through the glass. He
invited the Doctor, whom he found employed in the same way, to accompany
him. On our return, we breakfasted under the trees. He conversed at
great length with the Doctor respecting the Governor’s conduct to us,
his endless vexations, &c.

About two o’clock, a person came to enquire if the Emperor would receive
the Governor. He gave him an audience that lasted nearly two hours, and
ran over, without falling into a passion, he said, all the objects under
discussion. He recapitulated all our grievances; enumerated all his
wrongs; addressed himself, he observed, by turns to his understanding,
his imagination, his feelings, and his heart. He put it in his power to
repair all the mischief he had done, to recommence upon a plan
altogether new, but in vain, for that man, he declared, was without
fibres; nothing was to be expected from him.

This Governor, said the Emperor, assured him that, when the detention of
M. de Montholon’s servant took place, he did not know he was in our
service, and he added that he had not read Madame Bertrand’s sealed
letter. The Emperor observed to him that his letter to Count Bertrand
was altogether repugnant to our manners and in direct opposition to our
prejudices; that if he, the Emperor, were but a mere general and a
private individual, and had received such a letter from him, the
Governor, he would have called him out; that a man so well known and
respected in Europe, as the Grand Marshal, was not to be insulted, under
the penalty of social reprobation; that he did not take a correct view
of his situation with regard to us; that all his actions here came
within the province of history, and that even the conversation which was
passing at that moment belonged to history; that he injured every day,
by his conduct, his own government and his own nation, and that in time
he might feel the consequences of it; that his government would disclaim
his conduct in the end, and that a stain would attach itself to his
name, which would disgrace his children. “Will you allow me,” said the
Emperor, “to tell you what we think of you? We think you capable of
every thing; _yes, of every thing_; and while you retain your hatred, we
shall retain our opinion. I shall still wait for some time, because I
like to act upon certainties; and I shall then have to complain, not
that the worst proceeding of ministers was to send me to St. Helena, but
that they gave you the command of it. You are a greater calamity to us
than all the wretchedness of this horrible rock.”

The Governor’s answer to all this was that he was about to make a report
to his government; that he learned at least something from the Emperor,
but that he received only provoking treatment from us, and that we made
matters worse.

With respect to the Commissioners of the powers, whom the Governor
wished to present, the Emperor rejected them in their political
capacity, but assured the Governor that he would readily receive them as
private individuals; that he had no dislike to any one of them, not even
to the French Commissioner, M. de Montchenu, who might be a very worthy
man, who had been his subject ten years, and, having been an emigrant,
was probably indebted to him, the Emperor, for the happiness of
returning to France; that, besides, after all, he was a Frenchman; that
title was indelible in his eyes, and no opinion could destroy it in his
estimation, &c.

With regard to the new buildings at Longwood which were the great object
of the Governor’s visit, the Emperor replied to his communication on
that topic that he did not wish for them; that he preferred his present
inconvenient residence to a better, situated at a great distance, and to
be obtained at the expense of a great deal of bustle and the trouble of
moving; that the buildings which he had just mentioned to him required
years to be completed, and that before that time, either we should not
be worth the cost incurred for us, or Providence would have delivered
him from us, &c.

        ON THE BEAUTIFUL WOMEN OF ITALY.—MADAME GRASSINI—MADAME
                           V—— AND BERTHIER.

17th.—The Emperor sent for me about two o’clock; he dressed himself and
went out in the calash. Madame de Montholon was of the party. It was her
first appearance since her accouchement. The conversation turned
particularly on the Italian ladies, their character and beauty.

The young General, who effected the conquest of Italy, excited in that
country, from the first moment, every feeling of enthusiasm and
ambition. This the Emperor was delighted to hear and to repeat. Above
all, there was not a beauty who did not aspire to please and touch his
heart, but in vain. “My mind,” he said, “was too strong to be caught in
the snare; I fancied that there was a precipice under the flowers. My
situation was singularly delicate; I had the command of veteran
generals; the task I had to execute was immense; all my motions were
watched by jealous eyes; my circumspection was extreme. My good fortune
consisted in my prudence; I might have forgotten myself for an hour, and
how many of my victories,” said he, “depended on no greater length of
time!”

Several years afterwards, at the time of his coronation at Milan, his
attention was attracted by _Grassini_, the celebrated singer.
Circumstances were then more auspicious. He desired to see her, and
immediately after her introduction, she reminded him that she had made
her début precisely during the early achievements of the General of the
army of Italy. “I was then,” said she, “in the full lustre of my beauty
and my talent. My performance in the Virgins of the Sun was the topic of
universal conversation. I fascinated every eye and inflamed every heart.
The young General alone was insensible to my charms, and yet he was the
only object of my wishes! What caprice, what singularity! When I
possessed some value, when all Italy was at my feet, and I heroically
disdained its admiration for a single glance from you, I was unable to
obtain it; and now, how strange an alteration! you condescend to notice
me—now, when I am not worth the trouble and am no longer worthy of you!”

The celebrated Madame V.... was also among the crowd of Armidas; but,
tried with losing her time, she lowered her pretensions to Berthier,
who, from the first instant, lived but for her. The Commander-in-Chief
made him a present one day of a magnificent diamond worth more than
100,000 francs. “Here,” said he, “take that; we often play high, lay it
up against a rainy day.”—Scarcely had four-and-twenty hours elapsed,
before Madame Bonaparte came to tell her husband of a diamond which was
the subject of her admiration. It was the present that was to have been
laid up against a rainy day, which had already found its way from
Berthier’s hand to Madame ——’s head. He has since, in all the
circumstances of his life, been uniformly governed by her.

The Emperor, having gradually heaped riches and honours upon Berthier,
pressed him often to marry, but he as constantly refused, declaring,
that Madame V—— could alone make him happy. The son, however, of Madame
V—— having got acquainted with a duchess of Bavaria, who had come to
Paris, with the hope of obtaining a husband, through the Emperor’s
favour, Madame V—— , thought she was doing wonders and advancing her
son’s fortune by the marriage of her lover; and, with this impression,
she prevailed upon Berthier to espouse the Bavarian princess. But, said
the Emperor, there is no project, however excellent, which does not
become the sport of fortune; for scarcely was the marriage concluded,
when Madame V——’s husband died and left his wife at liberty. That event
proved to her and to Berthier the source of real despair; they were
inconsolable. Berthier came with tears in his eyes to communicate his
wretched fate to the Emperor, who laughed at his misfortune. To what a
miserable condition, he exclaimed, was he reduced; with a little more
constancy, Madame V—— might have been his wife!

FAUBOURG SAINT GERMAIN.—ARISTOCRACY; DEMOCRACY.—THE EMPEROR’S INTENTION
  TO MARRY A FRENCH WOMAN.

18th.—About four o’clock, I was sent for by the Emperor, who was in a
very weak state. He had, by an absence of mind, remained three hours in
a very hot bath and scalded his right thigh with the boiling water. He
had read two volumes in the bath. He shaved, but would not dress
himself.

At half-past seven, the Emperor ordered two covers to be laid in his
cabinet, and was very much out of temper, because his papers were thrown
into confusion by being removed for the purpose of using the table on
which they lay. They were replaced by his direction, and the covers laid
upon another small table.

We conversed for a long time; he brought me back to topics which often
suggested themselves to him when we were together, and upon which I must
endeavour not to be guilty of repetitions, the more so, as they possess
attractions, which to me are peculiarly interesting. We talked a great
deal about our youthful years and the time we passed at the military
school. This subject led him again to notice the new schools which he
had established at St. Cyr and at St. Germain, and he finally recurred
to the emigrants and those he called _nos encroûtés_. He became gay and
lively in consequence of some anecdotes of the Faubourg St. Germain,
respecting his person, which I related, and as the slightest things grew
into importance the moment he touched upon them, he said—“I see plainly
that my plan with respect to your Faubourg St. Germain was ill-managed.
I did too much or too little. I did enough to dissatisfy the opposite
party, and not enough to attach it to me altogether. Although some of
them were fond of money, the multitude would have been content with the
rattles and sound, with which I could have crammed them, without any
injury, in the main, to our new principles. My dear Las Cases, I did too
much and not enough, and yet I was earnestly occupied with the business.
Unfortunately, I was the only one seriously engaged in the undertaking.
All who were about me thwarted, instead of promoting it, and yet there
were but two grand measures to be taken with regard to you;—that of
annihilating, or that of melting you down into the great mass of
society. The former could not enter my head, and the latter was not an
easy task, but I did not consider it beyond my strength. And, in fact,
although I had no support, and was even counteracted in my views, I
nearly realized them at length. Had I remained, the thing would have
been accomplished. This will appear astonishing to him who knows how to
appreciate the heart of man and the state of society. I do not think
that history can furnish any case of a similar kind, or that so
important a result, obtained in so short a space of time, can be found.
I should have carried that fusion into effect, and cemented that union
by every sacrifice; it would have rendered us invincible. The opposite
conduct has ruined us, and may for a long time protract the misfortunes,
perhaps the last gasps of unhappy France. I once more repeat, that I did
too much or too little. I ought to have attached the emigrants to me
upon their return; I might have easily become an object of adoration
with the aristocracy. An establishment of that nature was necessary for
me. It is the real, the only, support of monarchy—its guide—its
lever—its point of resistance. Without it, the state is but a vessel
without a rudder, a real balloon in the air. But, the essence of
aristocracy, its talismanic charm, consists in antiquity, in age; and
these were the only things I could not create. The intermediate means
were wanting. M. de Breteuil, who had insinuated himself into my favour,
encouraged me. On the contrary, M. de T——, who certainly was not a
favourite with the emigrants, discouraged me by every possible means.
Reasonable democracy contents itself with husbanding equality for all,
as a fair ground of pretension and possession. The real line of conduct
would have been to employ the remains of aristocracy, with the forms and
intention of democracy. Above all, it was necessary to collect the
ancient names, those celebrated in our history. This is the only mode of
giving an instantaneous air of antiquity to the most modern
institutions.

“I entertained, upon that subject, ideas which were altogether peculiar
to myself. Had any difficulties been started by Austria and Russia, I
would have married a French woman. I would have selected one of the most
illustrious names of the monarchy. That was even my original thought, my
real inclination. If my ministers prevented me, it was only by their
earnest appeals to political views. Had I been surrounded by the
Montmorencies, the Nesles, and the Clissons, I should, by adopting their
daughters, have united them with foreign sovereigns. My pride and my
delight would have been to extend these noble French stocks, had they
taken part with us, or given themselves up to us altogether. They and
those belonging to me thought that I was influenced by prejudice alone,
when I was acting in conformity with the most profound combinations. Be
that as it will, your friends have lost more in me than they are aware
of!... They are destitute of soul, of the feeling of true glory. By what
unhappy propensity have they preferred wallowing in the mire of the
allies to following me to the top of mount Simplon, and commanding, from
its summit, the respect and admiration of the rest of Europe. Senseless
men!—I had, however,” he continued, “a project in my portfolio; time
alone was wanting to mature it, which would have rallied round me a
great number of that class of persons, and which, after all, would have
been but just. It was that every descendent of ancient marshals,
ministers, &c., should be considered at all times capable of getting
himself declared a duke, by presenting the requisite endowment. All the
sons of generals and governors of provinces were upon the same
principle, to be qualified to assume the title of count, and so on in
gradation. This would have advanced some, raised the hopes of others,
excited the emulation of all, and hurt the pride of none; grand, but
altogether harmless rattles, and belonging, besides, to my system and my
combinations.

“Old and corrupt are not governed like ancient and virtuous nations. For
one individual, at present, who would sacrifice himself for the public
good, there are thousands and millions who are insensible to every thing
but their own interests, enjoyments and vanity. To pretend, therefore,
to regenerate a people in an instant or as if one were travelling post,
would be an act of madness. The genius of the workman ought to consist
in knowing how to employ the materials he has at hand, and that is one
of the causes of the resumption of all the monarchical forms, of the
re-establishment of titles, of classes, and of the insignia of orders.
The secret of the legislator should consist in knowing how to derive
advantage even from the caprice and irregularities of those whom he
pretends to rule; and, after all, these gewgaws were attended with few
inconveniences, and not destitute of benefit. At the point of
civilization to which we have now attained, they are calculated to
attract the respect of the multitude, provided always that the person
decorated with them preserves respect for himself. They may satisfy the
vanity of the weak, without scaring, in the slightest degree, strong and
powerful minds.” It was very late, and the Emperor said, at parting,
“There is another pleasant evening spent.”

               OUR HOUSE ON FIRE.—-ETIQUETTE AT LONGWOOD.

19th.—The chimney of the saloon took fire in the night, but the flames
did not break out until day-light. Two hours sooner, and the building
would have been a heap of ashes.

The Emperor took a walk; he was attended by several of us, and we went
round the park on foot.

One of his shoe-buckles fell out, and we all eagerly strove to put it in
again; he, who succeeded, considered himself the most fortunate. The
Emperor, who would not have permitted this at the Tuileries, seemed here
to feel a kind of satisfaction at our conduct; he let us do as we liked,
and we were thankful to him for indulging us in an act, that did honour
to us, in our own opinion.

This leads me to observe that I have not yet spoken of our customary
manners when about his person, and I am more peculiarly induced to
notice them because we have received several London newspapers, which
circulate a thousand idle stories on this subject, and assert that the
imperial etiquette was as strictly maintained at Longwood as at the
Tuileries.

[Illustration: GROUND PLAN OF LONGWOOD.]

The Emperor behaved to us in the kindest manner, and with a paternal
familiarity. We were, on our part, the most attentive and respectful of
courtiers. We uniformly endeavoured to anticipate his wishes; we
carefully watched all his wants, and he had scarcely time to make a sign
with his hand, before we were in motion.

None of us entered his apartment without being sent for, and, if any
thing of importance was to be communicated to him, it was necessary to
apply to be admitted. If he walked separately with any of us, no other
presumed to intrude. In the beginning, we constantly remained uncovered
near his person, which appeared strange to the English, who had been
ordered to put on their hats, after the first salute. This contrast
appeared so ridiculous to the Emperor that he commanded us, once for
all, to behave like them. Nobody, except the two ladies, took a seat in
his presence, unless desired to do so. He was never spoken to till he
had spoken first, and always, and in all cases, the conversation was
under his control and guidance. Such was the etiquette at Longwood,
which was entirely, as it must be evident, that of our recollections and
feelings.

On our return, the Emperor received and questioned, for a long time, the
master of the Newcastle.

In consequence of the fire in the saloon, and a billiard-table being
placed in the dining-room, we dined in the topographical cabinet. After
dinner, there being no other apartment to retire to, we were obliged to
remain a long time at table. That circumstance seemed, however, to give
an additional interest to the conversation; we became more acquainted,
more united with each other; we gave a greater scope to our language,
and the evening passed off more rapidly.

ESTABLISHMENTS FOR MENDICITY IN FRANCE.—NAPOLEON’S PROJECTS RELATIVE TO
  ILLYRIA.—HOSPITALS.—THE FOUNDLING.—PRISONERS OF STATE.—IDEAS OF THE
  EMPEROR.

20th.—The Emperor sent for me in the morning; I found him reading an
English work on the poor’s rate, the immense sums raised, and the vast
number of individuals maintained at the expense of their parishes; the
account embraced millions of men and hundreds of millions of money.

The Emperor was apprehensive that he had not read the work correctly, or
that he had mistaken the meaning. The thing, he said, seemed altogether
impossible. He could not conceive by what vices and defects so many poor
could be found in a country so opulent, so industrious, and so abundant
in resources for labour as England. He was still less capable of
comprehending, by what prodigy the proprietors, overloaded with an
oppressive ordinary and extraordinary taxation, were also enabled to
provide for the wants of such a multitude. “But we have nothing,” he
observed, “in France to be compared to it in the proportion of a
hundredth or a thousandth part. Have you not told me that I sent you
into the departments on a particular mission with regard to mendicity?
Let us see, what is the number of our beggars? What did they cost? How
many poor-houses did I establish? What was the number they held? What
effect had they in removing mendicity?”

To this crowd of questions I was compelled to answer that a considerable
period of time had since elapsed, that my mind had been occupied with
several other objects, and that it was impossible for me to enter into
correct statements from mere recollection; but that I had the official
report itself among the few papers I had preserved, and that, the first
time he might be pleased to send for me, I should be enabled to satisfy
him. “But,” said he, “go instantly and look for it, things are not
profitable unless seasonably applied, and I shall soon run it over _with
my thumb_, as Abbé de Pradt ingeniously said; although, to tell the
truth, I don’t much like to think of such subjects; they remind me of
mustard after dinner.”

In two minutes the report was in his hand. “Well!” said the Emperor to
me, also, in a very few minutes, for it might be really said that he had
not turned over the leaves; “well, this, in fact, is not at all like
England. Our organization, however, had failed; I suspected as much, and
it was on that account I entrusted you with the mission. Your report
would have been in perfect conformity with my views. You took up the
consideration frankly and like an honest man, without fear of exciting
the displeasure of the minister, by depriving him of a great many
appointments.

“I am pleased with a great number of your details. Why did you not come
and converse with me about them yourself? You would have satisfied me,
and I should have known how to value your services.”—“Sire, as things
were then situated, it would have been impossible for me to do so; we
were then involved in the confusion and embarrassment caused by our
misfortunes.”—“Your observation is perfectly correct; you establish an
unquestionable position. The fact is that, in the flourishing state to
which I had raised the empire, no hands could any where be found
destitute of employment. It was idleness and vice alone that could
produce mendicants.

“You think that their complete annihilation was possible; and, for my
part, I am of the same opinion.

“Your levy _en masse_, to build a vast and single prison in each
department, was equally adapted to the tranquility of society and to the
well-being of those confined in it;—your idea of making them monuments
for ages would have attracted my attention. That gigantic undertaking,
its utility, its importance, the permanence of its results, were all in
my way.

“With respect to your university for the people, I am very apprehensive
that it would have been but a beautiful chimera of philanthropy, worthy
of the unsophisticated Abbé de Saint Pierre. There is, however, some
merit in the aggregate of those conceptions; but energy of character,
and an unbending perseverance, for which we are not generally
distinguished, would be requisite to produce any good result.

“For the rest, I every day collect ideas from you in this place, of
which I did not imagine you capable; but it was not at all my fault. You
were near me; why did you not open your mind to me? I did not possess
the gift of divination. Had you been minister, those ideas, however
fantastical they might at first have appeared to me, would not have been
the less attended to, because there is, in my opinion, no conception
altogether unsusceptible of some positive good, and a wrong notion, when
properly controlled and regulated, often leads to a right conclusion. I
should have handed you over to commissioners, who would have analyzed
your plans; you would have defended them by your arguments, and, after
taking cognizance of the subject, I alone should have finally decided
according to my own judgment. Such was my way of acting, and my
intention; I gave an impulse to industry; I put it into a state of
complete activity throughout Europe; I was desirous of doing as much for
all the faculties of the mind, but time was not allowed me. I could not
bring my plans to maturity at full gallop; and, unfortunately, I but too
often wasted them upon a sandy foundation, and consigned them to
unproductive hands.

“What were the other missions with which I entrusted you?”—“One in
Holland, another in Illyria.”—“Have you the reports?”—“Yes, Sire.”—“Go
for them.” But I had not got to the door, when he said, “Never mind,
come back, spare me the trouble of reading such matters!—They are
henceforth, in reality, altogether useless.”—What did not these words
unfold to me!

The Emperor resumed the subject of Illyria. “In obtaining possession of
Illyria, it was never my intention to retain it; I never entertained the
idea of destroying Austria. Her existence was, on the contrary,
indispensably requisite for the execution of my plans. But Illyria was,
in our hands, a vanguard to the heart of Austria, calculated to keep a
check upon her; a sentinel at the gates of Vienna, to keep her steady to
our interests. Besides, I was desirous of introducing and establishing
in that country our doctrines, our system of government, and our codes.
It was an additional step to the regeneration of Europe. I had merely
taken it as a pledge, and intended, at a later period, to exchange it
for Gallicia, at the restoration of Poland, which I hurried on against
my own opinion. I had, however, more than one project with regard to
Illyria; for I frequently fluctuated in my designs, and had few ideas
that were fixed on solid grounds. This arose rather from adapting myself
to circumstances than from giving an impulse and direction to them, and
I was every instant compelled to shift about. The consequence was that,
for the greater part of the time, I came to no absolute decision, and
was occupied merely with projects. My predominant idea, however,
particularly after my marriage, was to give it up to Austria as an
indemnity for Gallicia, on the re-establishment of Poland, at any rate,
as a separate and independent kingdom. Not that I cared upon whose head,
whether on that of a friend, an enemy, or an ally, the crown was placed,
provided the thing was effected. The results were indifferent to me. I
have, my dear Las Cases, formed vast and numerous projects, all
unquestionably for the advancement of reason and the welfare of the
human race. I was dreaded as a thunderbolt; I was accused of having a
hand of iron; but the moment that hand had struck the last blow, every
thing would have been softened down for the happiness of all. How many
millions would have poured their benedictions on me, both then and in
future times! But how numerous, it must be confessed, the fatal
misfortunes which were accumulated and combined to effect my overthrow,
at the end of my career! My unhappy marriage; the perfidies which
resulted from it; that villainous affair of Spain; from which I could
not disengage myself; that fatal war with Russia, which occurred through
a misunderstanding; that horrible rigour of the elements, which devoured
a whole army; ... and then, the whole universe against me!... Is it not
wonderful that I was still able to make so long a resistance, and that I
was more than once on the point of surmounting every danger and emerging
from that chaos more powerful than ever!... O destiny of man!—What is
human wisdom, human foresight!”—And then abruptly adverting to my
report, he said, “I observed, that you travelled over a great number of
departments. Did your mission last long? Was your journey agreeable? Was
it of real benefit to you? Did you collect much information? Were you
enabled to form a correct judgment on the state of the country, on that
of public opinion?

“I now recollect that I selected you precisely because you had just
returned from your mission to Illyria, and I found in your report
several things which made a strong impression upon me; for it is
surprising how many things at present are every day brought back to my
memory, which, at the time, struck me in you, and which, by a singular
fatality, were immediately afterwards completely forgotten. When any
appointments were about to take place to those special and confidential
missions, the decree, with blanks for the names, was laid before me, and
I filled them up with persons of my own selection—I must have written
your name with my own hand.”

“Sire,” I replied, “there never was, perhaps, a mission more agreeable
and satisfactory in every point of view. I commenced it early in the
spring, and proceeded from Paris to Toulon, and from Toulon to Antibes,
following the line of coast and occasionally diverging into the
interior. I travelled nearly thirteen hundred leagues, but unfortunately
the time was short. The minister, in his instructions, had strictly
limited the period to three, or at most, to four months. It would be
difficult for me to give an adequate description of all the delight,
enjoyments, and advantages which I derived from the journey. I was a
member of your Council, an officer of your household. I was every where
considered as one of your _missi dominici_, and was received with
suitable respect. The more I behaved with discretion, moderation, and
simplicity, visiting myself the high functionaries, whose attendance I
was authorized to require, the more I was treated with deference and
complaisance. For one, who shewed any distrust, or betrayed any symptom
of ill-humour or envy; (for I afterwards learnt from themselves, that my
character, as a nobleman, emigrant, and chamberlain, formed three
certain grounds for reprobation;) for one, I repeat, who looked upon me
with a jealous eye, I found many whose communications were altogether
unreserved, even upon subjects, respecting which I should not have
presumed to make inquiry. They assured me that they took pleasure in
unbosoming themselves to me with perfect openness; that they viewed my
situation, near the person of the sovereign, as a favourable medium; and
considered me as the confessor upon whom they relied for transmitting
their most secret thoughts to the _Most High_. The more I endeavoured to
convince them that they were mistaken with regard to my situation and
the nature of my mission, the more they were confirmed in the contrary
opinion. In so short a period, what a lesson for me on mankind! There
were none of these high functionaries who did not differ from each other
with regard to the views, means, and designs of all the objects under
consideration; and yet they were all men selected with care, of tried
ability, and generally of great merit. Persons in private life also
looked up to me as to a ray of Providence, and applied to me either
publicly or in secret. How many things did I not learn! How numerous the
denunciations and accusations communicated to me! What a multitude of
local abuses, of petty intrigues, were disclosed to me!

“Altogether unacquainted with affairs, and until then absolutely
ignorant of official proceedings, I made use of that peculiar
opportunity to obtain information. I did not fail to make myself
acquainted with all the objects and particular circumstances of every
party. I was not apprehensive of shewing my ignorance to the first who
presented themselves, for I was thus enabled to qualify myself for
discussing business with the others.

“It is true, Sire, that my special mission was restricted to the
mendicity establishments and the houses of correction: but feeling, as I
did, all the want of a stock of knowledge, fit to render myself useful
to the Council of State, and taking advantage of my appointment, I
connected with it, of my own accord, the minute inspection of prisons,
hospitals, and beneficent institutions, and I also took a survey of all
our ports and squadrons.

“How magnificent the combination which thus presented itself to my view!
I every where beheld the most perfect tranquillity and complete
confidence in the government; every hand, every faculty, every branch of
industry, was employed; the soil was embellished by the flourishing
state of agriculture, it was the finest time of the year; the roads were
excellent; public works were in progress in almost in every quarter;—the
canal of Arles, the noble bridge of Bordeaux, the works of Rochefort,
the canals from Nantes to Brest, to Rennes, to Saint Malo; the
foundation of Napoleonville, intended to be the key of the whole
peninsula of Britanny; the magnificent works of Cherbourg, those of
Antwerp, sluices, moles, or other improvements in most of the towns of
the Channel—such is the sketch of what I saw.

“On the other hand, the ports of Toulon, Rochefort, L’Orient, Brest,
Saint Malo, Havre, and Antwerp, displayed an extraordinary degree of
activity; our roads were filled with vessels, and the numbers increased
daily: our crews were training in spite of every obstacle, and our young
conscripts were becoming good seamen, fit for future service. I, who
belonged to the old naval establishment, was astonished at every thing I
saw on board, so very great were the improvements made in the art, and
so far did they exceed, in every point of view, all that I had
witnessed.

“The squadrons belonging to the different ports got under sail every
day, and executed their regular manœuvres, like the parades of
garrisons, and all this took place within sight of the English, who
thought it a ridiculous farce, without foreseeing the danger with which
they were threatened; for, never at any period was our navy more
formidable, or our ships more numerous. We already had upwards of 100
afloat or on the stocks, and we were making daily additions to the
number. The officers were excellent, and animated with zeal and ardour.
I had no idea whatever of the forward state of our preparations, before
I witnessed it in person, and should not have believed it, had I been
told of it.

“With respect to the mendicity establishments, the special object of my
mission, your intentions, Sire, had been ill understood, and the plan
was altogether unsuccessful. In most of the departments, mendicity not
only remained with all its defects, but no steps whatever had been taken
for its annihilation. The fact was that several prefects, so far from
making the establishments a terror to the _mendicants_, had merely
considered them as a refuge for the _poor_. Instead of holding out
confinement as a punishment, they caused it to be sought after as an
asylum; and thus the lot of the prisoners might be envied by the
hard-working peasantry of the neighbourhood. France might, in that way,
have been covered with similar establishments, which might have been
filled without diminishing the number of mendicants, who commonly make a
trade of begging, and follow it in preference. I was, however, enabled
to judge that the extirpation of the evil was possible, and the example
of some departments, in which the prefects had taken a better view of
the subject was sufficient to produce that conviction. There were a few
in which it had entirely disappeared.

“It is an observation which makes an immediate and striking impression,
that, all other things fairly averaged, mendicity is much more rare in
those parts which are poor and barren, and much more common in those
which are fruitful and abundant. It is also infinitely more difficult to
effect its destruction in the places where the clergy have enjoyed
superior wealth and power. In Belgium, for instance, mendicants were
seen to derive honour from their trade, and boast of having followed it
for several generations. These claims belonged peculiarly to them, and
that country was accordingly the rendezvous of mendicity.” “But I am not
surprised at it,” resumed the Emperor, “the difficulty of this important
consideration consists entirely in discriminating accurately between the
_poor_ man who commands our respect, and the _mendicant_ who ought to
excite our indignation; besides, our religious absurdities confound
these two classes so completely that they seem to make a merit, a kind
of virtue, of mendicity, and to encourage it by the promise of heavenly
rewards. The mendicants are, in reality, neither more nor less than
monks _au petit pied_; so that in the list of them we even find the
mendicant monks. How was it possible for such ideas not to produce
confusion in the mind, and disorder in society? A great number of saints
have been canonized, whose only apparent merit was mendicity. They seem
to have been transplanted to Heaven for that, which, considered as a
matter of sound policy, ought to have subjected them to castigation and
confinement in this world. This would not, however, have prevented them
from being worthy of Heaven. But go on.”—

“It was not, Sire, without emotion that I observed the details of the
charitable establishments. In contemplating the anxiety, the cares, the
ardent charity, of so many sympathetic hearts, I was enabled to
ascertain that we were far from yielding the palm, whatever might be the
consideration, to any other people, and that we merely had less
ostentation and made less use of artificial means to enhance our merits.
The South, above all, and Languedoc, in particular, displayed a zeal and
animation of which it would be difficult to form an adequate conception.
The hospitals and alms-houses were every where numerous and well
attended to. The foundlings had increased tenfold since the revolution,
and I instantly ascribed it to the corruption of the times; but I was
desired to remark, and constant reflection convinced me of the truth,
that the result was, on the contrary, to be attributed to very
satisfactory causes. I was assured that formerly the foundlings were so
wretchedly taken care of, and so badly fed, that the whole of them were
diminutive, sickly, and short-lived, and that from seven to nine
perished out of ten; while at present their food, cleanliness, and the
care taken of them, in every respect are such that nearly all of them
are preserved, and constitute a fine race of children. They are thus
indebted for their numbers solely to their preservation. Vaccination has
also contributed, in an immense proportion, to their increase. These
children are now treated with such attention as to give rise to a
singular abuse. Mothers, even in easy circumstances, are tempted to
expose their infants; they afterwards apply at the hospital, and, under
a charitable pretence, offer to bring up one themselves; it is their own
which is restored to them with the benefit of a small allowance. All
this is carried on through the favour of the agents themselves, and
often for the purpose of obtaining a trifling pension for one of their
relations. Another abuse of this kind, and not less extraordinary, was
that which I observed in Belgium, of persons getting their names entered
a long time before, for the purpose of entitling them to send their
children to the hospital. Any young couple, on their marriage, strove to
get their names entered for vacancies, which fell to them some years
afterwards, as a matter of right; it was a part of the marriage
settlement.”—“O Jesus! Jesus!” exclaimed the Emperor, shrugging up his
shoulders and laughing, “and after this make laws and regulations!”—

$1“$2”$3But with regard to the prisons, Sire, they were almost uniformly
the scenes of horror and real misery, the shame and disgrace of our
provinces, absolute sinks of corruption and infection, which I was
obliged to pass through with the utmost haste, or from which I was
driven back in spite of all my efforts. I had formerly visited certain
prisons in England, and indulged in a smile at the kind of luxury which
I observed in them; but it was quite a different thing with respect to
ours, and my indignation was excited by the contrary extreme. There are
no offences, I might even say crimes, that are not sufficiently punished
by such habitations, and those who leave them should not, in strict
justice, have any further expiation to make. Yet after all those
confined in them were merely under a simple accusation, while those who
had been found guilty, the real criminals, and hardened villains, had
their special prisons, their houses of correction, where they were,
perhaps, too well taken care of; and even, in the latter case, the
honest day-labourer might have reason to envy their lot, and make
comparisons injurious to Providence and society. Another striking
inconsistency was observable in these houses of correction; it was the
amalgamation, the habitual mixture of all the classes upon whom sentence
had been passed. Some being imprisoned for small offences only for a
year, and others for fifteen, twenty years, or for life, on account of
the dreadful crimes they had perpetrated, it necessarily followed that
they would be all reduced to one moral level, not by the amelioration of
the latter, but rather by the corruption of the former.

“What struck me also very forcibly in La Vendée and the adjacent country
was that maniacs had increased there, perhaps, tenfold more than in any
other part of the empire, and that persons were detained in the
mendicity establishments and other places of confinement, who were
treated as vagabonds, or likely to become so, and who having been taken
up in their childhood, had no knowledge of their parents or origin. Some
of them had marks of wounds on their persons, but were ignorant how they
had been inflicted. They had, no doubt, been made in their infancy. The
opportunity of employing these persons, who had not acquired a single
social idea, has been suffered to pass by; they are now unfit for any
purpose.”—“Ah!” exclaimed the Emperor, “this is civil war and its
hideous train; its inevitable consequences and its certain fruits! If
some leaders make fortunes, and extricate themselves from danger, the
dregs of the population are always trodden under foot, and become the
victims of every calamity!”

“With respect to other matters, I found in the aggregate of these
establishments a considerable number of persons who, I was told, whether
right or wrong, were prisoners of state, and were kept in custody by
order of the high, the intermediate, or the low, police.

“I listened to all those prisoners, I heard their complaints, and
received their petitions, certainly, without any engagement on my part;
for I had no right to contract any; and besides, I was perfectly aware
that, having heard their testimony only, I could not attach guilt to any
person. With the exception, however, of some notorious villains, they
did not really, in general, deserve more at farthest than the common
punishments of the correctional police.

“I found among them, in the prisons of Rennes, a boy between twelve and
fourteen, who had, when only a few months old, been taken with a band of
_Chauffeurs_. They had been all executed, and the boy had remained there
ever since, without any decision on his case. His moral capabilities may
be easily appreciated. He never saw, knew, or heard any but villains;
they were the only kind of people of whose existence he was able to form
an idea.

“At Mont Saint-Michel, a woman, whose name I have forgotten,
particularly attracted my attention. She had rather a pretty face,
pleasing manners, and a modest deportment. She had been imprisoned
fourteen years, having taken a very active part in the troubles of La
Vendée, and constantly accompanied her husband, who was the chief of a
battalion of insurgents, and whom she succeeded, after his death, in the
command. The wretchedness she suffered, and the tears she shed, had
sensibly impaired her charms. I assumed a severe air during the recital
of her misfortunes, but it was put on for the purpose of concealing the
emotions which she excited. She had, by the kindness of her manners and
her other qualifications, acquired a kind of empire over the vulgar and
depraved women that were about her. She had devoted herself to the care
of the sick; the prison infirmary was entrusted to her, and she was
beloved by every one.

“With the exception of that woman, a few priests, and two or three old
Chouan spies, the rest exhibited but a filthy compound of disgusting or
extravagant depravity.

“I met with a married man, possessing an annual income of 15,000 livres,
evidently confined in consequence of his wife’s intrigues, after the
manner of the ancient _lettres de cachet_; and with prostitutes, who
assured me they were detained, not as a punishment for the
indiscriminate profusion of their favours, but out of spite at their
want of complaisance for a single person. They told me lies, or they did
not; but in either case ought they to be honoured with the title of
prisoners of state, to be maintained at the expense of two francs a day,
and contribute to render the government odious and ridiculous? Finally,
I met with an unhappy man in a town of Belgium, who had married one of
those girls for whom the municipalities provide marriage portions on
great occasions. He was imprisoned on a charge of having stolen the
portion, because he had neglected to earn it. He was positively required
to discharge that important debt, and he as positively refused. He was,
perhaps, required to do what was absolutely impossible for him.

“Immediately upon my return to Paris, I called on M. Réal, prefect of
police of the district I had just visited. I considered it my duty, I
said, to communicate to him, in a _friendly_ manner, the result of my
observations. I must do him justice; for whether he was far from having
a bad heart, whether he was impressed with my plain dealing, or affected
perhaps, Sire, by the magic influence of your uniform, he thanked me,
observed that I was doing him a real service, and assured me that he
would take immediate steps for _relieving_ and _redressing_, such were
his words, the cases I had laid before him. Meeting him, however, a few
days afterwards at an assembly, he said, with apparent grief, ‘That is
an unfortunate business, and very unfavourable to your Amazon (he
alluded to General Mallet’s rash enterprise), which I thought myself
capable of doing a few days ago of my own accord. I cannot now pretend
to undertake it without an order from a superior quarter.’—I do not know
how the thing ended.”

The Emperor dwelt some time on the abuses I had pointed out, and then
concluded: “In the first place, in order to proceed regularly, it was
incumbent upon you to ascertain whether your information was well
founded, and to hear the evidence against the persons accused; and then
it must be frankly admitted that abuses are inherent in every human
establishment. You see that almost every thing, of which you complain,
is done by the very persons who were expressly entrusted with the means
of prevention. Can a remedy be provided, when it is impossible to see
what passes every where? There is, as it were, a net spread over the low
places, which envelops the lower classes. A mesh must be broken and
discovered by a fortunate observer like you, before any thing of the
matter is known in the upper regions. Accordingly, one of my dreams
would have been, when the grand events of war were completely
terminated, and I returned to the interior in tranquillity and at ease,
to look out for half a dozen, or a dozen, of real philanthropists, of
those worthy men who live but to do good. I should have distributed them
through the empire, which they should have secretly inspected for the
purpose of making their report to me. They would have been _spies of
virtue_! They should have addressed themselves directly to me, and
should have been my confessors, my spiritual guides, and my decisions
with them should have been my good works done in secret. My grand
occupation, when at full leisure, and at the height of my power, would
have been the amelioration of every class of society. I should have
descended to the details of individual comfort; and, had I found no
motive for that conduct in my natural disposition, I should have been
actuated by the spirit of calculation; for, after the acquisition of so
much glory, what other means would have been left me to make any
addition to it? It was because I was well aware that that swarm of
abuses necessarily existed, because I wished for the preservation of my
subjects, and was desirous of throwing every impediment in the way of
subordinate and intermediate tyranny, that I conceived my system of
state prisons, adapted to any crisis that might occur.”—“Yes, Sire, but
it was far from being well received in our saloons, and contributed not
a little to make you unpopular. An outcry was every where raised against
the _new bastiles_, against the renewal of _lettres de cachet_.”—“I know
it very well.” said the Emperor, “the outcry was echoed by all Europe,
and rendered me odious. And yet, observe how powerful was the influence
of words, envenomed by perfidy! The whole of the discontent was
principally occasioned by the preposterous title of my decree, which
escaped me from distraction, or some other cause; for, in the main, I
contend that the law itself was an eminent service, and rendered
individual liberty more complete and certain in France than in any other
country of Europe.

“Considering the crisis from which we had emerged, the factions by which
we had been divided, and the plots which had been laid, and were still
contriving, imprisonment became indispensable. It was, in fact, a
benefit; for it superseded the scaffold. But I was desirous of
sanctioning it by legal enactments, and of placing it beyond the reach
of caprice, of arbitrary power, of hatred, and of vengeance. Nobody,
according to my law, could be imprisoned and detained as a prisoner of
state, without the decision of my privy council, which consisted of
sixteen persons; the first, the most independent and most distinguished
characters of the state. What unworthy feeling would have dared to
expose itself to the detection of such a tribunal? Had I not voluntarily
deprived myself of the power of consigning individuals to prison? No man
could be detained beyond a year, without a fresh decision of the
Privy-Council, and four votes out of sixteen were sufficient to effect
his release. Two councillors of state were bound to attend to the
statements of the prisoners, and became from that moment their zealous
advocates with the Privy Council. These prisoners were also under the
protection of the Committee of individual liberty, appointed by the
Senate, which was the object of public derision, merely because it made
no parade of its labours and their results. Its services, however, were
great; for it would argue a defective knowledge of mankind to suppose
that Senators, who had nothing to expect from ministers, and who were
their equals in rank, would not make use of their prerogative to oppose
and attack them, whenever the importance of the case called for their
interference. It must also be considered that I had assigned the
superintendence of the prisoners, and of the police of the prisons, to
the tribunals, which, from that instant, paralyzed the exercise of every
kind of arbitrary authority by the other branches of administration and
their numerous subordinate agents. After such precautions, I do not
hesitate to maintain that civil liberty was as effectually secured by
that law in France as it could possibly be. The public misconceived, or
pretended to misconceive, that truth, for we Frenchmen must murmur at
every thing and on every occasion.

“The fact is, that at the time of my downfal the state prisons scarcely
contained 250 persons, and I found 9000 in them, when I became Consul.
It will appear, from the list of those who were imprisoned, and upon an
examination into the causes and motives of their confinement, that
almost every one of them deserved death, and would have been sentenced
to it by regular process of law; and it consequently follows that their
imprisonment was, on my part, a benefit conferred upon them. Why is
there nothing published against me on this subject at present? Where are
the serious grievances to be found with which I am reproached? There are
none in reality. If some of the prisoners afterwards made a merit of
their sufferings with the King, on account of their exertions in his
favour, did they not by that proceeding pronounce their own sentence and
attest my justice? For what may seem a virtuous action in the King’s eye
was incontestably a crime under me; and it was only because I was
repugnant to the shedding of blood on account of political crimes, and
because such trials would have but tended to the continuance of
commotion and perplexity in the heart of the country, that I commuted
the punishment to mere imprisonment.

“I repeat it, the French were, at my era, the freest people of all
Europe, without even excepting the English; for, in England, if any
extreme danger causes the suspension of the _Habeas Corpus_ act, every
individual may be sent to prison at the mere will of ministers, who are
not called upon to justify their motives, or to account for their
conduct. My law had very different limits.” He concluded with
saying;—“And then, at last, if, in spite of my good intention, and
notwithstanding my utmost care, all that you have just said, and no
doubt, many other things, were well founded, it must not still be
considered so easy a task as it is thought to create a beneficial
establishment for a nation. It is a remarkable circumstance that the
countries which have been separated from us have regretted the laws with
which I governed them. This is an homage paid to their superiority. The
real, the only, mode of passing a decisive sentence upon me, with regard
to their defects, would be to shew the existence of a better code in any
other country. New times are drawing near, it will be seen,” &c.

About five o’clock, I was told by the Grand Marshal, who had just left
the Emperor, that he wished to see me. He had staid at home the whole of
the day. I found him engaged in examining the new billiard-table. He was
apprehensive that the weather was too damp for walking, and he played at
chess until dinner. In the evening, he read us Crebillon’s _Atrée et
Thyeste_. That piece seemed horrible to us; we found it disgusting, and
by no means of a tragic cast. The Emperor could not finish it.

             EGYPT.—ST. JEAN D’ACRE.—THE DESERT.—ANECDOTES.

21st. About three o’clock, the Emperor called for his calash. He sent
for me, and we walked together to the bottom of the wood where he had
ordered the carriage to take him up. I had some particulars of no great
moment to communicate, which personally concerned him. We observed, in
the course of our ride, two vessels under sail for the island.

At dinner, the Emperor was very talkative. He had been just employed on
his campaign in Egypt, which he had, for some time, neglected, and
which, he said, would be as interesting as an episode of romance. In
speaking of his position at St. Jean d’Acre, he observed:—It was
certainly a daring thing to post myself thus in the heart of Syria, with
only 12,000 men. I was 500 leagues from Desaix, who formed the other
extremity of my army. It has been related, by Sydney Smith, that I lost
18,000 men before Acre, although my army consisted but of 12,000. An
obscure person, M...., who had just left college, as it seemed, who
knows nothing of what he describes, and whose only talent is that of
tacking some sentences together, with a view, no doubt, of converting
them to his emolument, the brother, however, of one whom I have loaded
with favours, and who was one of my Council of State, has recently
published something on that subject, on which I have cast a glance, and
which vexes me on account of its silliness and the unfavourable
colouring which he endeavours to throw over the glory and exploits of
that army.

“Had I been master of the sea, I should have been master of the East,
and the thing was so practicable that it failed only through the
stupidity or bad conduct of some seamen.

“Volney, who travelled in Egypt before the revolution, had stated his
opinion that that country could not be occupied without three great
wars, against England, the Grand Signor, and the inhabitants. The
latter, in particular, seemed difficult and terrible to him. He was
altogether mistaken in that respect, for it gave us no trouble. We had
even succeeded in making friends of the inhabitants, in the course of a
short time, and of uniting their cause with ours. A handful of Frenchmen
had thus been sufficient to conquer that fine country, which they ought
never to have lost. We had actually accomplished prodigies in war and in
politics. Our undertaking was altogether different from the crusades;
the crusaders were innumerable and hurried on by fanaticism. My army, on
the contrary, was very small, and the soldiers were so far from being
prepossessed in favour of the enterprise that, at first, they were
frequently tempted to carry off the colours and return. I had, however,
succeeded in familiarizing them with the country, which supplied every
thing in abundance, and at so cheap a rate that I was one time on the
point of placing them on half-pay for the purpose of laying by the other
half for them. I had acquired such an ascendancy over them, that I
should have been able, by a mere order of the day, to make them
Mahometan. They would have treated it as a joke, the population would
have been gratified, and the very Christians of the East would have
considered themselves gainers, and approved it, knowing that we could do
nothing better for them and for ourselves.

“The English were struck with consternation at seeing us in possession
of Egypt. We exposed to Europe the certain means of wresting India from
them. They have not yet dismissed their apprehensions, and they are in
the right. If 40 or 50,000 European families ever succeed in
establishing their industry, laws, and government in Egypt, India will
be more effectually lost to the English by the commanding influence of
circumstances than by the force of arms.”

In the course of the evening, the Grand Marshal put the Emperor in mind
of one of his conversations with Monge, the mathematician, at Cutakié,
in the midst of the desert. “What do you think of all this, citizen
Monge?” said Napoleon.—“Why, citizen general,” answered Monge, “I think,
if there are ever seen in this place as many equipages as at the Opera
house, there must first be some wonderful revolutions on the globe.” The
Emperor laughed very heartily at the recollection. He had, however, he
observed, a carriage with six horses on the spot. It was unquestionably
the first of the kind that travelled over the desert, and accordingly it
very much surprised the Arabs.

The Emperor remarked that the desert always had a peculiar influence on
his feelings. He had never crossed it without being subject to a certain
emotion. To him, he said, it was an image of immensity: it seemed to
have no bounds, neither beginning nor end; it was an ocean on terra
firma. His imagination was delighted with the sight, and he took
pleasure in drawing our attention to the observation that Napoleon meant
_Lion of the Desert_!...

The Emperor also told us that, when he was in Syria, it was a settled
opinion at Cairo that he never would be seen there again, and he noticed
the thievery and impudence of a little Chinese, who was one of his
servants. “It was,” said he, “a little deformed dwarf, whom Josephine
once took a fancy to at Paris. He was the only Chinese in France;
thenceforth she would always have him behind her carriage. She took him
to Italy, but as he was in the constant habit of pilfering, she wished
to get rid of him. With that view, I took him with me on my Egyptian
expedition. Egypt was a lift to him half-way on his journey. This little
monster was entrusted with the care of my cellar, and I had no sooner
crossed the desert than he sold, at a very low price, 2000 bottles of
capital claret. His only object was to make money, convinced that I
should never come back. He was not at all disconcerted at my return, but
came eagerly to meet me, and acquainted me, as he said, like a faithful
servant, with the loss of my wine. The robbery was so glaring that he
was himself compelled to confess it. I was much urged to have him
hanged, but I refused, because, in strict justice, I ought to have done
as much to those in embroidered clothes, who had knowingly bought and
drunk the wine. I contented myself with discharging and sending him to
Suez, where he was at liberty to do what he pleased.”

On this subject I must observe that we were induced, in this place, to
give momentary credit to a very singular coincidence. We were informed a
few months ago, that on board one of the Chinese traders, which were
then off the island, on their return to Europe, there was a Chinese, who
said he had been in the Emperor’s service in Egypt. The Emperor
instantly exclaimed, that it must be his little thief, whose story I
have just told; but it was, in fact, a cook of Kleber’s.

The Emperor put a sudden stop to the conversation, and, with more gaiety
than usual, turning to Madame Bertrand, said with a smile, “When shall
you be at your apartments in the Tuileries? When will you give your
splendid dinners to the ambassadors? But you will be obliged, at least,
I am told so, to have new furniture, for it is reported that the
fashions have entirely changed.” The conversation then naturally turned
on the magnificence and luxury which we had witnessed under the Emperor.

          PATERNAL ADVICE—REMARKABLE CONVERSATION—CAGLIOSTRO;
                       MESMER, GALL, LAVATER, &C.

22nd.—The Emperor came to my apartment about 10 o’clock, and took me out
to walk. We all breakfasted under the trees. The weather was delightful,
and the heat, though great, was not unwholesome. The Emperor ordered his
calash; two of us were with him, and the third accompanied us on
horseback. The Grand Marshal could not attend. The Emperor recurred to
some misunderstanding which had taken place among us a few days before.
He took a view of our situation and our natural wants;—“You are bound,”
said he, “when you are one day restored to the world, to consider
yourselves as _brothers_, on my account. My memory will dictate this
conduct to you. Be so, then, from this moment!” He next described how we
might be of mutual advantage to each other, the sufferings we had it in
our power to alleviate, &c. It was, at once, a family and moral lesson,
a lesson of feeling and conduct. It ought to have been written in
letters of gold. It lasted nearly an hour and a quarter, and will, I
think, never be forgotten by any of us. For myself, not only the
principles and the words, but the tone, the expression, the action, and
above all, the heart with which he delivered them, will never be
forgotten by me.

About five o’clock, the Emperor entered my apartment where I was
employed with my son, on the chapter of the battle of Arcole. He had
something to say to me, and I followed him to the garden, where he
resumed, at great length, the conversation that had taken place in the
calash....

We now dined in the old topographical cabinet, adjoining to that of the
Emperor, and the apartment formerly occupied by Montholon’s family,
which, with the help of the books and shelves lately received from
England, was converted into a tolerable library.

As the damage done by the fire in the saloon was long in repairing, we
were obliged to continue at table in our new dining-room until the
Emperor withdrew. This circumstance, however, gave additional interest
to the conversation.

The Emperor was very communicative to-day. The conversation turned on
dreams, presentiments, and foresights, which the English call _second
sight_. We exhausted every common-place topic, ordinarily connected with
these objects, and came at last to speak of sorcerers and ghosts. The
Emperor concluded with observing, “All these quackeries, and many
others, such as those of Cagliostro, Mesmer, Gall, Lavater, &c. are
destroyed by this sole and simple argument: _All that may exist, but it
does not exist._

“Man is fond of the marvellous; it has for him irresistible
fascinations; he is ever ready to abandon what is near at hand, to run
after what is fabricated for him. He voluntarily gives way to delusion.
The truth is, that every thing about us is a wonder. There is nothing
which can be properly called a phenomenon. Every thing in nature is a
phenomenon. My existence is a phenomenon. The wood that is put on the
fire and warms me, is a phenomenon; that candle yonder, which gives me
light, is a phenomenon. All the first causes, my understanding, my
faculties, are phenomena; for they all exist and we cannot define them.
I take leave of you here,” said he, “and lo! I am at Paris, entering my
box at the Opera. I bow to the audience; I hear their acclamations; I
see the performers; I listen to the music. But if I can bound over the
distance from Saint Helena, why should I not bound over the distance of
centuries? Why should I not see the future as well as the past? Why
should the one be more extraordinary, more wonderful, than the other?
The only reason is, that it does not exist. This is the argument which
will always annihilate, without the possibility of reply, all visionary
wonders. All these quacks deal in very ingenious speculations; their
reasoning may be just and seductive, but their conclusions are false,
because they are unsupported by facts.

“Mesmer and Mesmerism have never recovered from the blow dealt at them
by the report of Bailly on behalf of the Academy of Sciences. Mesmer
produced effects upon a person by magnetizing him to his face, yet the
same person, magnetized behind, without his knowing it, experienced no
effect whatever. It was therefore, on his part, an error of the
imagination, a debility of the senses; it was the act of the somnabule,
who, at night runs along the roof without danger, because he is not
afraid; but who would break his neck in the day, because his senses
would confound him.

“I once attacked the quack Puységur, on his somnabulism, at one of my
public audiences. He would have assumed a very lofty tone: I brought him
down to his proper level with only these words: If your doctrine is so
instructive, let it tell us something new! Mankind will, no doubt, make
very great progress in the next two hundred years; let it specify any
single improvement which is to take place within that period! Let it
tell me what I shall do within the following week! Let it declare the
numbers of the lottery, which will be drawn to-morrow!

“I behaved in the same manner to Gall, and contributed very much to the
discredit of his theory. Corvisart was his principal follower. He and
his colleagues have a great propensity to materialism, which is
calculated to strengthen their theory and influence. But nature is not
so poor. Were she so clumsy as to make herself known by external forms,
we should do our business more promptly and know a great deal more. Her
secrets are more subtle, more delicate, more evanescent, and have
hitherto escaped the most minute researches. We find a great genius in a
little hunchback; and a man, with a fine commanding person, turns out to
be a stupid fellow. A big head, with a large brain, is sometimes
destitute of a single idea; while a small brain is found to possess a
vast understanding. And observe the imbecility of _Gall_. He attributes
to certain protuberances propensities and crimes, which are not in
nature, but arise solely from society and the conventional usages of
mankind. What would become of the protuberance of theft, if there were
no property; of drunkenness, if there were no fermented liquors; and of
ambition, if there were no society?

“The same remarks apply to that egregious charlatan, Lavater, with his
physical and moral relations. Our credulity lies in the defect of our
nature. It is inherent in us to wish for the acquisition of positive
ideas, when we ought, on the contrary, to be carefully on our guard
against them. We scarcely look at a man’s features, before we pretend to
know his character. We should be wise enough to repel the idea and to
neutralize those deceitful appearances. I was robbed by a person who had
grey eyes, and from that moment am I never to look at grey eyes without
the idea, the fear, of being robbed? A weapon wounded me, and I am
afraid of it wherever I see it; but was it the grey eyes that robbed me?
Reason and experience, and I have been enabled to derive great benefit
from both, prove that all those external signs are so many lies; that we
cannot be too strictly on our guard against them, and that the only true
way of appreciating and gaining a thorough knowledge of mankind is by
trying and associating with them. After all, we meet with countenances
so hideous, it must be allowed,” (and as an instance he described one;
it was that of the governor,) “that the most powerful understanding is
confounded, and condemns them in spite of itself.”

                   SINGULAR SERIES OF VEXATIONS, &C.

23d.—The Emperor called upon me about three o’clock. He wished to take a
walk. He had a gloomy look, and had suffered much since yesterday. He
was seriously affected by the intense heat during his ride in the
calash. He had observed a new outer door which was making, and which
would have altered the whole interior of the topographical cabinet and
of Madame Montholon’s former apartment. He had not been consulted on the
occasion, and was sensibly affected at it. He sent instantly for the
person who had given the directions, and the wretched reasons he
assigned served only to vex him still more. We had come out to walk; but
it seemed decided that every thing was to irritate and put him in ill
humour that evening. He saw some English officers on his way, and turned
aside from them almost in anger, observing that shortly it would be
impossible for him to put his foot out of doors. A few paces off he was
joined by the Doctor, who came to tell him, unseasonably enough, of some
arrangements that were making for him, (the Emperor) and to ask his
opinion on the subject. It was one of the topics which, perhaps, hurt
his feelings most. He made no answer, his ordinary resource against
disappointment; but this time he kept silence with a fretfulness which
he could not conceal. He came up with the carriage, and got in; but on
our way we met some more English officers, and then he suddenly ordered
the coachman to drive off, at a gallop, in another direction.

The new door-way, however, which had been made in the house without his
knowledge, and which he found so inconvenient, still lay heavy on his
heart. He was about to lighten the load by a lively playfulness with the
wife of the person who had ordered it, and who happened to be in the
calash. “Ah,” said he, “are you there? You are in my power; you shall
pay the penalty. The husband is the guilty person; it is the wife that
shall answer for him.” But instead of accommodating herself to the sense
in which the words were uttered, which she might have done without the
least inconvenience, and with the certainty of a satisfactory result,
she persisted in making lame excuses for her husband, and repeating
reasons, which served but to revive his dissatisfaction. Finally, to
fill up the chapter of cross-purposes, one of us, on discovering the
tents of the camp, informed him that the evolutions and manœuvres of
the preceding day were in celebration of one of the great victories
gained by the English in Spain, and that the regiment which executed
them had been very nearly destroyed in that battle. “A regiment. Sir, is
never destroyed by the enemy; it is immortalized,” was his only answer.
It is true, that it was delivered very dryly.

For myself, I meditated in silence on this accumulation of
contrarieties, which struck such repeated blows in so short a time. It
was a precious moment for an observer. I estimated the mortification
which they were calculated to produce, and I remarked with admiration,
how little he betrayed. I said to myself: This is the _intractable man_,
this the _tyrant_! One would have supposed that he knew what was passing
in my mind, for, when we left the calash, and were a few paces before
the others, he said to me in a low tone, “If you like to study mankind,
learn how far patience can go, and all that one can put up with,” &c.

On his return, he called for tea; I had never seen him take any. Madame
de Montholon was, for the first time, in possession of her new saloon.
He wished to see it, and observed that she would be much better
accommodated than any of us. He called for fire, and played at chess
with several of us successively. He gradually recovered his natural
temper and ate a little at dinner, which completely restored him. He
indulged in conversation, and again reverted to his early years, which
always possessed fresh charms for him. He spoke a great deal of his
early acquaintances, and of the difficulties which some of them
experienced in obtaining admission to him after his elevation, and
observed that, “if the threshold of his palace was impassable, it was in
spite of himself. What then,” said he, “must be the situation of other
sovereigns in that respect!”

We continued the conversation until eleven, without noticing the
lateness of the hour.

                  MADAME DE B—— —ANECDOTES RESPECTING
                             THE EMIGRANTS.

24th.—To-day the Emperor tried the billiard-table which had just been
placed, and went out, but the weather being very damp, he returned
almost immediately.

He conversed with me in his apartment, before dinner, on the emigrants,
and the name of Madame de B...., who had been _dame d’atours_ to Madame,
and was very conspicuous in the commencement of our affairs, was
mentioned. The Emperor observed, “But is not this Madame de B.... a very
dangerous woman?”—“Certainly not,” I replied; “she is, on the contrary,
one of the best women in the world, with a great deal of wit, and an
excellent judgment.” “If that is the case,” said the Emperor, “she must
have much cause to complain of me. This is the painful consequence of
false representations; she was pointed out as a very dangerous
character.”—“Yes, Sire, you made her very unhappy. Madame de B....
placed all her happiness in the charms of society, and you banished her
from Paris. I met with her in one of my missions, confined within her
province, and pining away with vexation, yet she expressed no resentment
against your Majesty, and spoke of you with great moderation.” “Well,
then! why did you not come to me, and set me right?”—“Ah, Sire, your
character was then so little known to us, compared with what I know it
to be at present, that I should not have dared to do so. But I will
mention an anecdote of Madame de B.... when in London, during the high
tide of our emigration, which will make you better acquainted with her
than any thing I could say. At the time of your accession to the
Consulate, a person, just arrived from Paris, was invited to a small
party at her house. He engrossed the attention of the company, in
consequence of all the particulars that he had to communicate respecting
a place, which interested us so very materially. He was asked several
questions respecting the Consul. He cannot, said he, live long, he is
most delightfully _sallow_. These were his words. He grew more animated
by degrees, and gave as a toast—The death of the First Consul! Oh
horrible! was the instantaneous exclamation of Madame de B..... What,
drink to the death of a fellow creature! For shame! I will give a much
better one: The King’s health!”

“Well,” said the Emperor, “I repeat that she was very ill used by me, in
consequence of the representations which were made to me. She had been
described to me as a person fond of political intrigues, and remarkable
for the bitterness of her sarcasms. And this puts me in mind of an
expression which is perhaps wrongly attributed to her, but which struck
me, however, solely on account of its wit. I was assured that a
distinguished personage, who was very much attached to her, was seized
with a fit of jealousy, for which she clearly proved that she had given
no cause. He persisted however, and observed that she ought to know that
the wife of Cæsar should be free from suspicion. Madame de B.... replied
that the remark contained two important mistakes; for it was known to
all the world that she was not his wife, and that he was not Cæsar.”

After dinner, the Emperor read to us parts of the comedies of the
Dissipateur and the Glorieux, but he was so little pleased with them
that he left off; they did not possess a sufficient degree of interest.
He had a severe pain in his right side. It was the effect of the damp to
which he had been exposed during his morning walk, and we were not
without apprehensions of its being a symptom of the ordinary malady of
this scorching climate.

On my return home, I found a letter from England, with a parcel,
containing some articles for my toilet. The Griffin ship of war had just
arrived from England.

THE EMPEROR RECEIVES LETTERS FROM HIS FAMILY.—CONVERSATION WITH THE
  ADMIRAL.—THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE ALLIED POWERS.

25th.—About nine o’clock, I received from the Grand Marshal three
letters for the Emperor. They were from Madame Mère, the Princess
Pauline, and Prince Lucien. The latter was enclosed in one addressed to
me, from Rome, by Prince Lucien, dated the 6th of March. I also received
two from my agent in London.

The Emperor passed the whole of the morning in reading the papers from
the 25th of April to the 13th of May. They contained accounts of the
death of the Empress of Austria, the prorogation of the French Chambers,
Cambrone’s acquittal, the condemnation of General Bertrand, &c. He made
many remarks upon all these subjects.

About three, Admiral Malcolm requested to be presented to the Emperor.
He brought him a series of the Journal des Debats to the 13th of May.
The Emperor desired me to introduce him, and he conversed with him
nearly three hours. He gave great pleasure to the Emperor, who treated
him, from the first moment, with a great deal of freedom and good
nature, as if he had been an old acquaintance. The Admiral was entirely
of his opinion with respect to a great number of subjects. He admitted
that it was extremely difficult to escape from St. Helena, and he could
see no inconvenience in allowing him to be at large in the island. He
considered it absurd that Plantation-house had not been given up to the
Emperor, and felt, but only since his arrival, he confessed, that the
title of General might be offensive. It struck him that Lady Loudon’s
conduct had been ridiculous here, and would be laughed at in London. He
thought that the Governor had good intentions, but did not know how to
act. Ministers had, in his opinion, been embarrassed with respect to the
Emperor, but entertained no hatred against him; they did not know how to
dispose of him. Had he remained in England, he would have been, and was
still, a terror to the Continent; he would have been too dangerous and
efficient an instrument in the hands of Opposition, &c. He was
apprehensive, however, that all these circumstances put together would
detain us here a long time; and he expressed his confidence that it was
the intention of Ministers, with the exception of the necessary
precautions to prevent his escape, that Napoleon should be treated with
every possible indulgence at St. Helena, &c. He delivered himself upon
all these points in so satisfactory a manner that the Emperor discussed
the business with him, with as little warmth as if he had not been
concerned in the matter.

At one moment, the Emperor produced a sensible effect upon him; it was
when, alluding to the Commissioners, he pointed out the impossibility of
receiving them. “After all, Sir,” said he, “you and I are men. I appeal
to you, is it possible that the Emperor of Austria, whose daughter I
married, who implored that union on his knees, who keeps back my wife
and my son, should send me his Commissioner, without a line for myself,
without the smallest scrap of a bulletin with respect to my son’s
health? Can I receive him with consistency? Can I have any thing to
communicate to him? I may say the same thing of the Commissioner sent by
Alexander, who gloried in calling himself my friend, with whom, indeed,
I carried on political wars, but had no personal quarrel. It is a fine
thing to be a Sovereign, but we are not on that account the less
entitled to be treated as men; I lay claim to no other character at
present! Can they all be destitute of feeling? Be assured, Sir, that
when I object to the title of General, I am not offended. I decline it
merely because it would be an acknowledgment that I have not been
Emperor; and, in this respect, I advocate the honour of others more than
my own. I advocate the honour of those with whom I have been, in that
rank, connected by treaties, by family and political alliances. The only
one of those Commissioners, whom I might perhaps receive, would be that
of Louis XVIII., who owes me nothing. That Commissioner was a long time
my subject, he acts merely in conformity to circumstances, independent
of his option; and I should accordingly receive him to-morrow, were I
not apprehensive of the misrepresentations that would take place, and of
the false colouring that would be given to the circumstance.”

After dinner, the Emperor again alluded to the time of his Consulate, to
the numerous conspiracies which had been formed against him, to the
celebrated persons of that period, &c. I have already noticed these
topics at considerable length. The conversation lasted until one o’clock
in the morning—a very extraordinary hour for us.

THE EMPEROR’S COURT.—EXPENSES, SAVINGS, HUNTING AND SHOOTING
  ESTABLISHMENT, MEWS, PAGES, SERVICE OF HONOUR, &C.

26th—28th. Our usual mode of living, an airing in the carriage in the
middle of the day; conversation at night.

On the 27th the Emperor received, for a moment, a colonel, a relation of
the family of Walsh Serrant, who was on his return from the Cape in the
Haycomb, and was to sail next day for Europe. He had been Governor of
Bourbon, and entertained us with many agreeable particulars respecting
that island.

After dinner, the conversation turned on the old and new Court, with
their arrangements, expenses, etiquette, &c. I have already mentioned
most of these points in another place, and many of them were repeated on
the present occasion. I pass over what would seem but a literal
repetition.

The Emperor’s Court was, in every respect, much more magnificent than
any thing seen up to that period, and yet, said he, the expense was
infinitely less. That vast difference was caused by the suppression of
abuses, and by the introduction of order and regularity into the
accounts. His hunting and shooting establishment, with the exception of
some useless and ridiculous particulars, he observed, as that of
falconry and some others, was as splendid, as numerous, and as striking,
as that of Louis XVI., and the annual disbursement, he assured us, was
but 400,000 francs, while the King’s amounted to seven millions. His
table was regulated according to the same system. Duroc had, by his
regularity and strictness, done wonders in that respect. Under the
kings, the palaces were not kept furnished, and the same articles were
transferred from one palace to another; the people belonging to the
Court had no furniture allowed them, and every one was obliged to look
out for himself. Under him, on the contrary, there was not a person in
attendance who did not find himself provided as comfortably, or even
more so, with every thing that was necessary or suitable, in the
apartment assigned to him, than in his own house.

The Emperor’s stud cost three millions, the expense of the horses was
averaged at 3000 francs a horse yearly. A page cost from 6 to 8000
francs. That establishment, he observed, was perhaps the most expensive
belonging to the palace, and accordingly the education of the pages and
the care taken of them, were the subjects of just encomium. The first
families of the empire were solicitous to place their children in it,
and they had good reason, said the Emperor.

With respect to the etiquette of the Court, the Emperor said he was the
first who had separated the _service of honour_ (an expression invented
under him) from that which was absolutely necessary. He had dismissed
every thing that was laborious and substantial, and substituted what was
nominal and ornamental only. “A king,” he said, “is not to be found in
nature, he is the mere creature of civilization. There are no naked
kings; they must all be dressed,” &c.

The Emperor remarked that it was impossible for any one to be better
informed of the nature and relation of all these matters than himself;
because they had been all regulated by him, according to the precedents
of past times, from which he had lopped off whatever was ridiculous, and
preserved every thing that appeared suitable.

The conversation lasted until after eleven o’clock. It had been kept up
with tolerable spirit; and the Emperor again observed, on leaving us,
that, after all, we must be a good-natured kind of people to be able to
lead so contented a life at St. Helena.

FRESH INSTANCE OF THE GOVERNOR’S MALIGNITY, &c.—DESPERATE PROJECT OF
  SANTINI, THE CORSICAN.

29th.—The weather had been bad for some days; the Emperor took advantage
of a fine interval to examine a tent, which the admiral had, in a very
handsome manner, ordered to be erected for his accommodation by his
ship’s crew, having heard him complain, in the course of conversation,
of the want of shade, and of the impossibility of enjoying himself in
the air out of his apartment. The Emperor conversed with the officer and
men who were putting the last hand to the work, and ordered a napoleon
to be given to each of the seamen.

We learnt to-day that the last vessel had brought a book on the state of
public affairs for the Emperor, written, as it was said, by a Member of
Parliament. It had been sent by the author himself, and the following
words were inscribed in letters of gold on the outside,—_To Napoleon the
Great_. This circumstance induced the Governor to keep back the work, a
rigour, on his part, which formed a singular contrast with his eagerness
to supply us with libels, that treated the Emperor so disrespectfully.

During dinner, the Emperor, turning, with a stern look, to one of the
servants in waiting, exclaimed, to our utter consternation: “So then,
assassin, you intended to kill the Governor!—Wretch!—If such a thought
ever again enters your head, you will have to do with me; you will see
how I shall behave to you.” And then, addressing himself to us, he said,
“Gentlemen, it is Santini, there, who determined to kill the Governor.
That rascal was about to involve us in a sad embarrassment. I found it
necessary to exert all my authority, all my indignation to restrain
him.”

In order to explain this extraordinary transaction, it is necessary for
me to observe that Santini, who was formerly usher of the Emperor’s
cabinet, and whose extreme devotion had prompted him to follow his
master and serve him, no matter, he said, in what capacity, was a
Corsican, of deep feeling and a warm imagination. Enraged at the
Governor’s ill usage, no longer able to bear with patience the affronts
which he saw heaped upon the Emperor, exasperated at the decline of his
health, and affected himself with a distracting melancholy, he had, for
some time, done no work in the house, and, under pretence of procuring
some game for the Emperor’s table, his employment seemed to be that of
shooting in the neighbourhood. In a moment of confidence, he told his
countryman Cypriani that he had formed the project, by the means of his
double barrelled piece, of killing the Governor, and then putting an end
to himself. And all, said he, to rid the world of a monster.

Cypriani, who knew his countryman’s character, was shocked at his
determination, and communicated it to several other servants. They all
united in entreating him to lay aside his design, but their efforts,
instead of mitigating, seemed but to inflame his irritation. They
resolved then to disclose the project to the Emperor, who had him
instantly brought before him: “And it was only,” he told me some time
afterwards, “by _imperial_, by _pontifical_ authority, that I finally
succeeded in making the scoundrel desist altogether from his project.
Observe for a moment the fatal consequences which he was about to
produce. I should have also passed for the murderer, the assassin, of
the Governor, and in reality it would have been very difficult to
destroy such an impression in the mind of a great number of people.”

The Emperor read to us La Mort de Pompée, which was stated in the
journals to be the subject of general interest at Paris, on account of
its political allusions. And this gave rise to the remark that
government had been obliged to forbid the representation of Richard, and
that, certainly on the fifth and sixth of October, Louis XVI. little
thought of its ever being prohibited for its allusions to another. “The
fact is that times are wonderfully changed,” said the Emperor.

30th.—The Emperor, after a few turns in the garden, went to General
Gourgaud’s apartment, where he was a long time employed, with his
compasses and pencil, in laying down the coast of Syria, and the plan of
Saint Jean d’Acre, which the general was to execute. In marking some
points about Acre, he said:—“I passed many unpleasant moments there.”

In the evening we had Le Mariage de Figaro, which entertained and
interested us much more than we had been led to expect. “It was,”
observed the Emperor, in shutting the book, “the Revolution already put
into action.”

               LA HARPE’S MÉLANIE.—NUNS.—CONVENTS.—MONKS
                    OF LA TRAPPE.—THE FRENCH CLERGY.

31st.—The weather was horrible about three o’clock, and the Emperor
could scarcely reach Madame de Montholon’s saloon. He amused himself for
some time there in reading the Thousand and One Nights, and afterwards,
perceiving a volume of the Moniteur on which M. de Montholon was then
employed, and which lay open in the part relative to the negotiations
for a maritime armistice in 1800, his whole attention was absorbed by
them for upwards of an hour.

After dinner, the Emperor read first La Mère Coupable, in which we felt
interested, and next the Mélanie of La Harpe, which he thought
wretchedly conceived and very badly executed. “It was,” he said, “a
turgid declamation, in perfect conformity with the taste of the times,
founded in fashionable calumnies and absurd falsehoods. When La Harpe
wrote that piece, a father certainly had not the power of forcing his
daughter to take the veil; the laws would never have allowed it. This
play, which was performed at the beginning of the Revolution, was
indebted for its success solely to the extravagance of public opinion.
Now, that the passion is over, it must be deemed a wretched performance!
La Harpe’s characters are all unnatural. He should not have attacked
defective institutions with defective weapons.”

The Emperor said that La Harpe had so completely failed in his object,
with regard to his own impressions, that all his feelings were in favour
of the father, while he was shocked at the daughter’s conduct. He had
never seen the performance, without being tempted to start from his
seat, and call out to the daughter: “You have but to say, No, and we
will all take your part; you will find a protector in every citizen.”

He observed that, when he was on service with his regiment, he had often
witnessed the ceremony of taking the veil. “It was a ceremony very much
attended by the officers, and which raised our indignation, particularly
when the victims were handsome. We ran in crowds to it, and our
attention was alive to the slightest incident. Had they but said, _No_,
we should have carried them off sword in hand. It is consequently false
that violence was employed: seductive means only were resorted to.
Those, upon whom they were practised, were kept secluded perhaps, like
recruits. The fact is that, before they had done, they had to pass the
ordeal of the nuns, the abbess, the spiritual director, the bishop, the
civil officer, and finally the public spectators. Can it be supposed
that all these had agreed to concur in the commission of a crime?”

The Emperor declared that he was an enemy to convents in general, as
useless, and productive of degrading inactivity. He allowed, however, in
another point of view, that certain reasons might be pleaded in their
favour. The best _mezzo termine_, and he had adopted it, was, in his
opinion, that of tolerating them, of obliging the members to become
useful, and of allowing annual vows only.

The Emperor complained that he had not had time enough to complete his
institutions. It had been his intention to enlarge the establishments of
Saint Denis and Ecouen, for the purpose of affording an asylum to the
widows of soldiers, or women advanced in years. “And then,” he added,
“it must also be admitted that there were characters and imaginations of
all kinds; that compulsion ought not to be used with regard to persons
of an eccentric turn, provided their oddities are harmless, and that an
empire, like France, might and ought to have houses for madmen, called
_Trappistes_. With respect to the latter,” he observed, “that if any one
ever thought of inflicting upon others the discipline which they
practised, it would be justly considered a most abominable tyranny, and
that it might, notwithstanding, constitute the delight of him who
voluntarily exercised it on himself. Such is man, such his whims, or his
follies!... He had tolerated the monks of Mount Cenis, but these, at
least,” he added, “were useful, very useful, and might be even called
heroic.”

The Emperor expressed himself in his Council of State in the following
words, when the organization of the University was about to take place:
“It is my opinion that the monks would be far the best body for
communicating instruction, were it possible to keep them under proper
control, and to withdraw them from their dependence upon a foreign
master. I am disposed to be favourable to them. I should, perhaps, have
had the power to reinstate them in their establishments, but they have
made the thing impossible. The moment I do any thing for the clergy,
they give me cause to repent it. I do not complain of the old
established clergy, for with them I am sufficiently satisfied; but the
young priests are brought up in a gloomy fanatical doctrine; there is
nothing Gallican in the young clergy.

“I have nothing to say against the old bishops. They have shewn
themselves grateful for what I did for religion; they have realized my
expectations.

“Cardinal de Boisgelin was a man of sense, a virtuous character, who had
faithfully adopted me.

“The Archbishop of Tours, Barral, a man of great acquirements, and who
was of essential service to us in our differences with the Pope, was
always very much attached to me.

“The worthy Cardinal du Belloy, and the virtuous Bishop Roquelaure, had
a sincere affection for me.

“I made no difficulty whatever in placing Bishop Beausset among the
Dignitaries of the University, and I am convinced that he was one of
those who, in that capacity, most sincerely conducted themselves in
conformity with my views.

“All these old bishops possessed my confidence, and none of them
deceived me. It is not a little singular that those whom I had the
greatest cause to complain of were precisely those whom I had chosen
myself; so very true is it that the holy unction, though it attaches us
to the kingdom of Heaven, does not deliver us from the infirmities of
the earth, from its irregularities, its obscenities, its turpitudes.”

The conversation next turned upon the want of priests in France, the
obligation of engaging them at the age of sixteen, and the difficulty,
even the impossibility, of finding any at twenty-one.

It was the Emperor’s wish that they should be ordained at a more
advanced age. The answer of the bishops and the Pope himself was, “It is
very well: your reasons are very just; but if you wait for that period
you will find none to ordain, and yet you admit that you are in want of
them.”

“I have no doubt,” observed the Emperor, “that, after me, other
principles will be adopted. A conscription of priests and nuns will,
perhaps, be seen in France, as a military conscription was seen in my
time. My barracks will, perhaps, be turned into convents and seminaries.
Thus goes the world. Poor nations! In spite of all your knowledge, all
your wisdom, you continue, like individuals, the slaves of fashionable
caprice.”

It was nearly one o’clock in the morning before the Emperor retired. It
was, he said, a real victory over _ennui_, and a great relief for the
want of sleep.

                    MARIA ANTOINETTE.—THE MANNERS OF
               VERSAILLES.—ANECDOTE.—BEVERLEY.—DIDEROT’S
                            PÉRE DE FAMILLE.

August 1.—The weather was dreadful. About three o’clock, the Grand
Marshal came to look for me; but as I had at that moment ventured out, I
was not to be found. It was on account of some English, whom he had to
present to the Emperor.

The Emperor sent for me at five; he was in a bad humour, and not a
little so, he said, on my account. The visit of the English, the bad
weather, the want of the saloon and an interpreter, had all combined to
vex him.

He was reading the Veillées du Château, which, he observed, were
tiresome, and he left them for the Tales of Margaret, Queen of Navarre.

He afterwards adverted to Versailles; the Court, the Queen, Madame
Campan, and the King, were the principal subjects of his remarks, and he
said many things, some of which I have already noticed. He concluded
with observing that Louis XVI. would have been a perfect pattern in
private life, but that he had been a sorry King; and that the Queen
would no doubt have been, at all times, the ornament of every circle,
but that her levity, her inconsistencies, and her want of capacity, had
not a little contributed to promote and accelerate the catastrophe. She
had, he remarked, deranged the manners of Versailles; its ancient
gravity and strict etiquette were transformed into the free and easy
manners and absolute tittle-tattle of a private party. No man of sense
and importance could avoid the jests of the young courtiers, whose
natural disposition for raillery was sharpened by the applauses of a
young and beautiful Sovereign.

One of the most characteristic anecdotes of that day was told. A gallant
and worthy German general arrived at Paris, with a special
recommendation to the Queen, from the Emperor Joseph, her brother. The
Queen thought she could not do him a greater favour than to invite him
to one of her private parties. He found himself, it may be easily
imagined, a little out of his element in such company, but it was every
one’s wish to treat him with marked respect, and he was obliged to take
a leading part in the conversation. He was unfortunate in the selection
of his topics, and in his manner of introducing them. He talked a great
deal about _his white mare, and his grey mare_, which he valued above
all things. The subject gave rise to a number of arch inquiries on the
part of the young courtiers, respecting a thousand frivolous points,
which he had the good-nature to answer, as if they were matters of
importance. In conclusion, one of them asked to which of the two he gave
the decided preference: “Really,” answered the general, with peculiar
significance, “I must confess, that, if I were in the day of battle on
my white mare, I do not believe I should dismount to get on my grey
one.” At length he made his bow, and the bursts of laughter that
followed may be easily conceived. The conversation took another turn
after his departure; the attractions of white and brown beauties were
long and ingeniously canvassed, and, the Queen having asked one of the
party which he preferred, he instantly assumed a grave air, and
imitating the solemn tone of the Austrian, answered, “Really, Madam, I
must confess, that if I were in the day of battle on....” “Enough,”
interposed the Queen, “spare us the remainder.”

After dinner he read Beverley and the Père de Famille to us. The latter,
in particular, excited his animadversion. To us it seemed a paltry
production. What most amused the Emperor, as he said, was that it was
Diderot’s, that Coryphœus of philosophers and of the Encyclopedia.
All it contained was, he said, false and ridiculous. The Emperor entered
into a long examination of the details, and concluded with saying, “Why
reason with a madman in the height of a raging fever? It is remedies and
a decisive mode of treatment that he needs. Who does not know that the
only safeguard against love is flight? When Mentor wishes to secure
Telemachus, he plunges him into the sea. When Ulysses endeavours to
preserve himself from the Syrens, he causes himself to be bound fast,
after having stopped the ears of his companions with wax.”

    HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE EMIGRATION TO COBLENTZ.—ANECDOTES, &C.

2nd.—Uninterrupted bad weather, with heavy rains. The Emperor was not
well; he felt his nerves very much irritated.

He sent for me to breakfast with him. During the whole of breakfast, and
a long time afterwards, the conversation again turned on the emigration.
I have already remarked that he often brought me back to the subject.
His enquiries to-day were directed to the particulars of what had passed
at Coblentz, our situation, our disposition, our organization, our
views, and our resources, and at the end of all my answers, he
concluded, observing: “You have already several times acquainted me with
a considerable part of those things, and yet I do not retain them,
because you communicate them without regularity. Reduce them to a
consistent historical summary. How could you be better employed in this
place? And then, my dear Las Cases, you will have a piece ready at hand
for your journal.” This demand was like that addressed by Dido to Æneas,
and I too might have exclaimed, _Infandum regina, jubes_ ... however, I
executed the sketch as completely as my memory and judgment enabled me,
for the subject began to grow old, and I was, at that time, very young.
I give it as I read it, a short time afterwards, to Napoleon.

“Sire, after the famous events which overthrew the Bastile, and set all
France in agitation, most of our Princes, who found themselves
implicated in the consequences, fled from the country, with the sole
view, at that period, of securing their personal safety. They were soon
after joined by persons of considerable rank, and by a number of young
men; the former, induced by the connection which they had with them, and
the latter by a persuasion that the measure of itself indicated, in some
degree, a striking, generous, and decided devotedness. When a certain
number were collected, the idea suggested itself of converting to a
political end that which, until then, had been produced by zeal and
chance alone. It was thought that if, with the assistance of these
assemblages, a kind of small power could be created, it might be enabled
to re-act, with advantage, on the interior, become a lever to
insurrection there, make an impression on the public mind, and restrain
popular commotion; while it would be, abroad, a title or pretext for
applying to foreign Powers and claiming their attention. This was the
origin of the emigration; and it is confidently stated that this grand
idea was conceived by M. de Calonne,[3] as he passed through
Switzerland, in the suite of one of our Princes, who was on his way from
Turin to Germany.

Footnote 3:

  Some one who considers himself well informed has assured me that this
  is erroneous, as M. de Calonne did not reach Germany till the measure
  of emigration had been already decided upon; adding that, so far from
  having contrived or instigated it, he had actually censured it.

“The first assemblage took place at Worms, under the Prince de Condé.
The most celebrated was that at Coblentz, under the King’s two brothers,
one of whom came from Italy, where he had at first found an asylum in
the Court of the King of Sardinia, his father-in-law, and the other
arrived by way of Brussels, after escaping the crisis, which had made a
captive of Louis XVI. at Varennes.

“I was one of the first of those who assembled at Worms. The number
about the Prince was scarcely fifty when I arrived. In the entire
effervescence of youth, and with the first inspiration of what was
noble, I hastened to Worms with the most innocent simplicity of heart.
My reading and my prayer each morning consisted of a chapter of Bayard.
I expected, on reaching Worms, to be, at the very least, seized and
embraced by so many brothers in arms; but, to my great surprise (and it
was my first lesson on mankind), instead of this affectionate reception,
I and a companion were, all at once, examined and watched, for the
purpose of ascertaining that we were not spies. We were afterwards
carefully sounded with regard to our interests, our views, and the
pretensions by which we might have been actuated, and, finally, great
pains were taken to prove to us, and to make the Prince perceive (and
this plan was renewed on every fresh arrival), that our numbers
increased greatly, and exceeded, no doubt, already, the places and
favours which he had to confer. My companion was so shocked that he
proposed to me to return instantly to Paris.

“We, who composed the assemblage, in order to make ourselves useful or
to acquire importance, undertook, three or four of us by turns, to form
a kind of regular guard about the Prince’s person night and day; for we
dreamt already of nothing but conspiracies and assassination, so very
powerful and redoubtable did we think ourselves, and when relieved,
whilst on this kind of voluntary guard, we had the honour of being
admitted to the Prince’s table. Three generations of Condé constituted
its ornament, a singular circumstance, which was renewed with more
striking effect in the army of Condé, in which the grandfather fought in
the centre, while the son and grandson commanded the right and left,
where they were, I believe, both wounded, and on the same day.

“The Princess of Monaco had followed the Prince of Condé; he married her
afterwards, but she then governed and did the honours of his
establishment. We had the opportunity of hearing at that table some of
the guests assert and re-assert to the Prince that we were already more
than enough to enter France; that his name and a white handkerchief were
sufficient; that the star of Condé was about to shine forth once more;
that the occasion was singularly happy, and that it was necessary to
seize it; and I would not pledge myself, that adulation was not pushed
so far as to suggest very interested personal views to the Prince.

“Worms, from the nature of its meeting, and the character of its chief,
always evinced more regularity, more austerity of discipline, than
Coblentz, where there was a display of more agitation, luxury, and
pleasure. Worms was accordingly called the _camp_, and Coblentz the
_City_ or the _Court_.

“The importance of the leader was in proportion to the force under his
command, and of this the Prince of Condé was so sensible that he never
saw any one leave him without regret, and remembered it a long time. I
was not, on that account, the less eager to go to Coblentz, the moment
it acquired a certain degree of splendour. I had relations and friends
there, and it was, besides, more attractive, from superior magnificence,
activity, and grandeur. Coblentz became in a short time a focus of
foreign and domestic intrigues. Two distinct parties might be observed
there; Messrs. d’Avaray, de Jaucourt, and some others, were the
confidential friends, the advisers, or the ministers, of Monsieur, now
Louis XVIII. The Bishop of Arras, the Count de Vaudreuil, and others,
were those of Monseigneur, the Count d’Artois; and it was confidently
stated that, even then, these Princes manifested distinctly enough the
same political differences which, it is pretended, have since
characterized them. M. de Breteuil, resident at Brussels, and charged,
according to his own declaration, with unlimited powers by Louis XVI.,
had formed a third party, and added to the complication of our affairs.

“M. de Calonne was relied on for our financial department, and the old
Marshal de Broglie and the Marshal de Castries were at the head of our
military establishment. The brave and able M. de Bouilly, who had left
France after the affair of Varennes, found it impossible to remain with
us, and followed King Gustavus III. to Sweden.

“The emigration had, however, assumed a grand character, thanks to the
care employed for its propagation. Agents had traversed the provinces,
circulars had been distributed in the mansions and country-seats,
summoning every gentleman to join the Princes, and act in co-operation
with them for the security of the altar and the throne, the revenge of
their honour, and the recovery of their rights. An absolute crusade had
been preached, and with so much more effect, as it made an impression on
minds disposed to attend to it. Among the whole of the nobility and
privileged classes there was not a single person who did not feel
himself cut to the quick by the decrees of the Assembly. All, from him
who filled the highest rank to the lowest country squire, had been
deprived of what they held most dear; for the former had lost his title
and his vassals, and the latter had seen his turret and his pigeon-house
invaded, and his hares shot. Accordingly, the movement to begin the
journey was immediate and universal; it could not be abandoned, under
the penalty of dishonour, and the women were directed to send spindles
to those who hesitated, or were too tardy. Whether then from passion,
pusillanimity, or a point of honour, the emigration became a real
infection; multitudes rushed furiously beyond the frontiers; and what
contributed not a little to increase the evil was the means employed by
the leaders of the Revolution to promote it in secret, while they
affected to oppose it in public. They declaimed, in vague terms, against
it from the tribune, it is true; but they took great care that all the
passages should be left open. Did the zeal of the emigrants slacken?—the
declaimers became more violent, and it was decided that the barriers
should be strictly guarded. Then those who had been left behind were
reduced to despair, because they had not taken advantage of the
favourable moment. But, accidentally, or from inattention, the barriers
were again opened, and they were passed with eagerness by those who were
determined not to expose themselves to another disappointment. It was by
this dextrous management that the Assembly assisted its enemies in
plunging themselves into the abyss.

“The able men of the faction had, from the beginning, conceived that
such a measure would deliver them from the heterogeneous parts that
checked their progress, and that the property of all these voluntary
exiles would secure to them incalculable resources. The officers thought
they did wonders in stealing away from their regiments, while the
leaders of the Revolution, on their part, excited the soldiers to
revolt, in order to force them to it. They got rid, by these means, of
enemies who were highly dangerous, and obtained, on the contrary, in the
non-commissioned officers, zealous co-operators, who became heroes in
the national cause; it was they who furnished great captains, and who
beat all the veteran troops of foreign powers.

“The consequence was that Coblentz collected all that was illustrious
belonging to the Court in France, and all that was opulent and
distinguished belonging to the provinces. We were thousands, consisting
of every branch, uniform, and rank of the army; we peopled the town and
overran the palace. Our daily assemblages about the persons of the
Princes seemed like so many splendid festivals. The Court was most
brilliant, and our Princes were so effectually its Sovereigns that the
poor Elector was eclipsed and lost in the midst of us, which induced a
person to observe to him, very pleasantly, one day, whether from perfect
simplicity or keen raillery, that, among all those who thronged his
palace, he was the only stranger.

“During the grand solemnities, we occasionally had public galas; and the
respectable inhabitants were permitted to take a view of the tables. We
then exulted at witnessing the admiration expressed by the people of the
country for the pleasing countenance and chivalrous appearance of
Monseigneur the Count d’Artois, and we were proud of the homage paid by
them to the acquirements and talents of Monsieur. It was worth while to
see with what arrogance we paraded with us, as it were, the whole
dignity, the lustre of our monarchy, and, above all, the superiority of
our Sovereign and the elevation of our Princes. _His Majesty the King_,
was the expression which we pompously used in the German circles to
designate the King of France; for that was, or ought to be, in our
opinion, his title in point of pre-eminence with respect to all Europe.
The Abbé Maury, whom we had at first received with acclamation, but who,
by the by, lost much of our esteem in a very short time, had discovered,
he assured us, that such was his right and his prerogative. Shall I give
another instance of overweening pride and conceit?

“At a later period, during our greatest disasters, and when our cause
was completely ruined, an Austrian officer, of superior rank, charged
with despatches for the Court of London, invited to dinner several of
our officers with whom he had formerly been acquainted on the Continent.
After dinner, and very near the time when every truth comes out, the
company began to talk politics, and he happened to say that, on his
departure from Vienna, one of the principal subjects of conversation was
the marriage of Madame Royale (now Duchess d’Angouleme) with the
Archduke Charles, who at that moment enjoyed great celebrity. ‘But it is
impossible!’ observed one of his French guests. ‘And why?’ ‘Because it
is not a suitable marriage for Madame.’—‘How!’ exclaimed the Austrian,
seriously offended, and almost breathless, ‘His Royal Highness
Monseigneur, the Archduke Charles! not a suitable match for your
Princess.’ ‘Oh! no, Sir, it would be but a garrison match for her!’

“Besides, these lofty pretensions were instilled into us with our
education; they belonged to us as national sentiments, and our Princes
were not exempt from them. With us the King’s brothers disdained the
title of Royal Highness, they had the pretension of addressing all the
sovereigns by the title of brother; the rest of the system was carried
on in a proportionate way, and there was accordingly but one feeling in
Europe against our Versailles, manners and the presumption of our
Princes.

“Gustavus III. said, at Aix-la-Chapelle—‘Your Court of Versailles was
not accessible; it indulged too much in haughtiness and ridicule. When I
was there, there was scarcely any attention paid to me, and, when I left
it, I brought away the titles of _booby_ and _blockhead_.’

“The Duchess of Cumberland, who was married to the King of England’s
brother, had to complain, at the same time and in the same city, that
the Princess de Lamballe did not grant her the honours of the
folding-doors.

“The old Duke of Gloucester complained, on his own account, at a later
period in London, of one of our Princes of the blood, and added that the
Prince of Wales laughed heartily, because he, the Prince of Wales,
addressing the same Prince by the title of Monseigneur, the latter
studiously endeavoured to model his language so as not to return the
compliment.

“At Coblentz, however, when our circumstances were altered, our Princes
condescended to change their manners in that respect, and to let
themselves down to the level of the foreign Princes. They were then with
the Elector of Treves, a Prince of Saxony, their mother’s brother, whom,
by way of parenthesis, we were at that time eating up, and who was
afterwards deprived of his possessions on our account. They condescended
to call him their _uncle_, and he was allowed to call them his
_nephews_. It is confidently stated that he said to them one day, ‘It is
to your misfortunes that I am indebted for such affectionate
expressions; at Versailles you would have treated me as plain M. l’Abbé,
and it is not certain that you would have received my visits every day.’
It was added that he spoke the truth, and that they had given melancholy
proofs of it to his brother, the Count of Lusatia, who was present.

“The Princes generally passed their evenings in the company of their
intimate friends. One of them was, most of the time, at the house of
Madame de Polastron, to whom he paid attentions that were justified by
her constancy and her behaviour. Frequent attempts were made to destroy
the intimacy, but in vain, for Madame de Polastron was above all the
cabals employed for the purpose; and, in addition to her amiable manners
and excellent conduct, was completely disinterested, and carefully
avoided all interference in political affairs. She saw but very little
company. I was indebted to a female relative for the pleasure of being
admitted to it; but, as it was necessary to withdraw before the Prince’s
arrival, I never had the honour of seeing him there.

“Monsieur passed his evenings at Madame de Balby’s, Dame d’Atours to
Madame. Madame de Balby, who was lively, witty, a warm friend and a
determined enemy, attracted all the most distinguished characters. It
was an honour to be admitted to her house, which was the centre of taste
and fashion. Monsieur sometimes remained there until a late hour; and
when, after the crowd had slipped away and the circle was contracted, he
happened to be communicative, it must be confessed that he was as
superior to us by the charms of his conversation as by his rank and
dignity.

“So much for our manner of living and our outward appearance at
Coblentz; this was the fair side of our situation; but we were less
happy in a political point of view—that was the degrading side.”

“Good!” said the Emperor, “I begin to find your drawing-room details too
long. This is, however, excusable in you. The subject is a pleasing one
to you. You were then young; but go on.”

“Sire, the whole of our number was but a noble and brilliant mob, and
presented the image of complete confusion. It was anarchy striving
without, to establish, it was said, order within—a real democracy
struggling for the re-establishment of its aristocracy. We presented, on
a small scale, and merely with a few shades of difference, a copy of
every thing that was passing in France. We had among us zealous
adherents to our ancient forms, and ardent admirers of novelty; we had
our constitutionalists, our intolerants, and our moderates. We had our
empirics, who sincerely regretted that they had not made themselves
masters of the King’s person, for the purpose of acting with violence in
his name, or who frankly avowed that they entertained the design of
declaring his incapability. Finally, we had also our Jacobins, who
wished, on their return, to kill, to burn, to destroy every thing.

“No direct authority was exercised over the multitude by our
Princes.—They were our Sovereigns, it was true, but we were very unruly
subjects, and very easily irritated. We murmured on every occasion, and
it was particularly against those who joined us last that our common
fury was directed. It was, we declared, so much glory and good fortune
of which they deprived our exploits and our hopes. Those who were once
admitted considered every subsequent arrival too late. It was maintained
that all merit on that score was at an end. If all continued to be
received in the same way, the whole of France would soon be on our side,
and there would no longer be any person to punish.

“Denunciations of every kind, and from every quarter, were then showered
down upon those who joined us. A Prince de Saint-Maurice, son of the
Prince de Montbarey, found it impossible to resist the storm, although
he had the formal support of every distinguished character, and that of
the Prince himself, who deigned to employ supplication in his favour,
and said, ‘Alas! gentlemen, who is there that has not faults to reproach
himself with in the Revolution? I have been guilty of several, and, by
your oblivion of them, you have given me the right of interceding for
others.’ This did not spare M. de Saint-Maurice the necessity of making
his escape as soon as possible. His crime was that of having belonged to
the Society of the Friends of the Negroes, and of having been violently
attacked in the midst of us by a gentleman of Franche Comté, who
denounced M. de Saint-Maurice for having caused his mansions to be
burnt. It was, however, discovered, a few days afterwards, that the
brawling assailant had no mansion and was neither from Franche Comté,
nor a gentleman: he was a mere adventurer.

“M. de Cazalès, who had filled France and Europe with the celebrity of
his eloquence and courage in the National Assembly, had,
notwithstanding, lost the popular favour at Coblentz. When he arrived at
Paris, a report was spread among us that the Princes would not see him,
or would give him an ungracious reception. We collected eighty natives
of Languedoc to form, in opposition to his own wishes, a kind of escort
for him. M. de Cazalès was the honour of our province; we conducted him
to the Princes, by whom he was well received.

“A deputy of the third estate, who had highly distinguished himself in
the Constituent Assembly by his attachment to royalty, was among us. One
of our Princes, addressing him one day in the crowd, said, ‘But, Sir,
explain to me then.—You are so worthy a man, how could you, at the time,
take the oath of the _jeu de paume_?’ The deputy, struck dumb by the
attack, at first stammered out that he had been taken unawares—that he
did not foresee the fatal consequences—but promptly recovering himself,
he replied with vivacity: ‘I shall, however, observe to Monseigneur that
it was not that which led to the ruin of the French monarchy, but in
fact the assemblage of the nobility, which joined us in consequence of
the very persuasive letter written by Monseigneur.’—‘Stop there,’
exclaimed the Prince, patting him on the stomach, ‘be cool, my dear Sir;
I did not intend to vex you by that question.’

“Something like a system of regularity, whether good or bad, was,
however, adopted in the course of time. We were classed by corps and by
provinces; we had cantonments assigned to us, and were supplied with
arms. The King’s body-guards were again formed, clothed, equipped, and
paid, and soon became a superb corps in appearance and discipline. The
coalition of Auvergne and the marine corps, part on foot and part on
horseback, attracted peculiar notice by its discipline, knowledge, and
union. Our resignation and self-denial could not be too much admired.
Each officer was henceforth but a private soldier, subject to exercises
and fatigues, very contrary to his former manner of life, and exposed to
the greatest privations, for there was no pay, and many of that number
had soon no resource to depend on but the contributions of their more
fortunate comrades. We deserved a better fate, or, to speak more
correctly, we were worthy of a better enterprize. All the officers
belonging to the same regiments had been collected together in separate
bodies, in order that they might be ready to take the command of their
soldiers, who would not fail to join them, as we thought, on their first
seeing them. Such was our delusion! It was from a similar motive that
the gentlemen were classed according to their respective provinces, no
doubt being entertained of their efficient influence over the mass of
the population. Our weakness consisted in the conviction that we
continued to be wished for, respected, adored.

“All these bodies were publicly exercised and manœuvred, and the
diplomatic remonstrances which were made on the subject were answered
with a confident assurance that no such thing existed, or that it
certainly should be prevented. We had generals appointed, a staff
formed, and every thing which distinguishes head-quarters, even to the
office of grand-provost, arranged. Our Princes were gradually surrounded
with all that constitutes a real government. They had Ministers for the
affairs of the moment, and even for France, when we should return, so
certain and near at hand did that time appear.

“M. de Lavilleurnois, who was afterwards so much talked of, on account
of the share which he had in a royalist conspiracy, and who died at
Sinnamary, in consequence of the events of Fructidor, was intrusted with
the Administration of the Police. He set off at an early period to
perform its duties clandestinely at Paris. He had conceived a sincere
affection for me, and was determined to make me his son-in-law. He made
use of the most urgent arguments to induce me to follow him; but I
refused: I disliked the nature of his office. Otherwise, what different
combinations in my destiny!

“We had also direct relations with almost every Court. The Princes had
envoys at them, and received theirs at Coblentz. Monseigneur, the Count
d’Artois, visited Vienna, I believe, but I can state with certainty that
he was at Pilnitz. The nobility, in a body, addressed a letter to
Catherine, from whom we received M. de Romansoff as Ambassador. That
Empress saw, with pleasure, the storm that was rising in the south of
Europe; she cheerfully fanned a flame, which might prove very favourable
to her views, without putting her to any expense, and she accordingly
shewed herself ardent in her sentiments, and enthusiastic in her
promises. She did not despair, in that crisis, of making a dupe of
Gustavus III., whose contiguous activity was troublesome to her; she had
prevailed upon him, it is said, to undertake the crusade, by flattering
him with the rank of Generalissimo. I do not know if this Prince, who
certainly was a very superior character for his time, and possessed a
great share of understanding and talent, suffered himself to be deluded
by her. It is, however, undeniable that he displayed great attachment to
our cause, and announced his wish to fight for it in person. When he
left Aix la Chapelle to arrange his ultimate measures for that purpose
in Sweden, I heard him say, on taking leave of the Princess de Lamballe:
‘You will see me again shortly, but I am, nevertheless, obliged, on my
own account, to adhere to certain proceedings, to certain measures of
caution; for the part I have to play is of a very delicate nature. Know
that I, who am desirous of returning to fight at the head of your
aristocrats in France, am, at home, the first democrat of the country.’

“We also received envoys from Louis XVI., who presented public messages
in reprobation of our conduct, and had confidential conferences, perhaps
totally different. At least, we acted as if that had been the case;
openly declaring that he was a captive, and that we ought to take no
notice of any of his orders; that we were bound to take every thing he
was compelled to say in a contrary sense, and that, when he exhorted us
to peace, he was, in reality, calling upon us to go to war. It is
accordingly my opinion that we were very detrimental to the tranquillity
of the unfortunate Monarch, and that we had our special share in the
pardon which he bequeathed by his will to his friends, who, by an
indiscreet zeal, as he observes, did him so much injury.

“Our emigration, however, was prolonged in spite of all the promises
which were made to us, and of all the hopes with which our fancy was
flattered. With what illusions, what idle tales, what absurdities, was
our impatience mocked! whether those who invented them anticipated our
disappointment, or were themselves deceived. It was pleasantly
calculated that, according to our letters and gazettes, we had, in less
than eighteen months, set in motion nearly two millions of men, although
we ourselves had seen none of them. But those initiated in the mystery
assured us, in special confidence, that these troops marched only by
night, for the purpose of more effectually surprising the democrats, or
that they passed in the day-time only by platoons and without uniform;
or told us some other story of a similar kind. On the other hand, we
shewed each other a heap of letters from all countries and the best
sources, written in an enigmatical style, and which were thought to be
intelligible to us alone. One was acquainted that fifty thousand
Bohemian glasses had been just sent off for his country; another was
informed that ten thousand pieces of Saxon porcelain would soon be sent
off; and a third received intelligence that twenty-five bales of cocoa
would be addressed to him, with other fooleries of the same kind.

“How was it possible, I now ask myself, that men of understanding, for
there certainly were a great many among the number, that Ministers, who
had formerly governed us, and others who were destined to succeed them,
should be gulled by such wretched stuff, or that the plain good sense,
which we possessed as a multitude, did not make us laugh in their faces?
But no; we were not the less convinced that we were near the
accomplishment of our hopes; that the moment was at hand; that it would
infallibly happen; that we had only to show ourselves; that we were
eagerly expected, and that all would fall prostrate at our feet.”

Here the Emperor, who had often interrupted me with laughter and
raillery, said, in a very serious tone, “How very faithful is the
picture you have drawn! I recognise a crowd of your friends in it.
Truly, my dear Las Cases, and I say it without meaning any offence to
you, vapouring, credulity, inconsistency, stupidity itself, might be
said, in spite of all their wit, to be specially their lot. When I
occasionally wished to be amused, and divested myself of all reserve,
for the purpose of giving them full scope, and encouraging their
confidence in me, I have heard, in the Tuileries, under the Consulate
and the Empire, things not less ridiculous than those which you now
relate. None of them ever entertained a doubt of any thing. The love of
the French for their Kings was centered, they assured me, in my person.
I could henceforth do what I pleased; I had a right to use my power; I
should never meet with any other obstacle but a handful of incorrigible
persons who were the detestation of all. That counter-revolution so much
dreaded, observed another, was but child’s play to me; I had effected it
with the utmost ease. And (will this be believed?) ‘the only thing
wanting to it,’ said he, in an insinuating tone, ‘is the substitution of
the ancient white colour for those which have done us so much injury in
all countries.’ The idiot! That was the only blot which he could find in
our escutcheon. I laughed out of sheer pity, although I felt some
difficulty in restraining my feelings; but for his part, his sincerity
was unquestionable; he was fully persuaded that he spoke as I thought;
and still more so that the generality thought as he did.[4] But go on.”

Footnote 4:

  It is certainly an inherent weakness in our nature to deceive
  ourselves with respect to the sentiments that are entertained of us by
  others. At Coblentz, where we threw away so much money, where so many
  amiable and brilliant young men, more to be dreaded, no doubt, from an
  excess than a want of education, filled every house and visited every
  family, it was natural to believe that we should be beloved, and
  accordingly we thought ourselves adored. Well! at the time of my exile
  at the Cape of Good Hope, I was placed by a singular chance under the
  guard of an inhabitant of Coblentz, who had witnessed the brilliant
  moments of our emigration. I felt great pleasure in renewing the
  subject with him. We could not have any secrets on that head to
  conceal from one another; twenty-five years had elapsed. Well, then,
  “you were not absolutely hated,” said he, “but our real affection was
  reserved for your adversaries, for their cause was ours. Liberty had
  slipped in among us through you. There, in the midst of you, even
  before your eyes, we had formed clubs, and God knows how often we
  laughed in them at your expense, &c.” And it happened to him more than
  once, he assured me, when mingled with the crowd, which resounded with
  acclamations as we passed, to shout with a considerable number of his
  comrades, “Long live the French Princes, and may they drink a little
  in the Rhine! You spoke of the reception we gave you,” said he, “it
  was that which we gave to Custine, which you should have seen! There
  you would have had an opportunity of appreciating our real sentiments.
  We ran with enthusiasm to meet him: we crowned his soldiers; a great
  number of us enlisted in his army, and several of them became
  generals. As for me, I missed the opportunity of making my fortune.”

“The appearance of the Duke of Brunswick at Coblentz, and the arrival of
the King of Prussia at the head of his troops, were subjects of great
joy and expectation to the whole of the emigrants. Heaven opens at
length before us! was our exclamation, and we are about to return to the
land of promise. It was, however, the opinion of persons of judgment and
experience, from the beginning, that our struggle would have the same
result as all those that resembled it in history, and that we should be
but instruments and pretexts for foreigners, who only pursued their
private interest, and entertained no feeling for us.

“M. de Cazalès, whom a short time much improved, expressed himself to
that effect with much energy. We beheld, with delight, the Prussians, as
they filed off through the streets of Coblentz, on their march to our
frontiers. ‘Foolish boys,’ he exclaimed, ‘you admire, with enthusiasm,
those troops and all their train. You rejoice at their march; you ought
rather to shudder at it. For my own part, I should wish to see these
soldiers, to the last man of them, plunged in the Rhine. Wo be to them
who incite foreigners to invade their country! O my friends, the French
nobility will not survive this atrocity! They will have the affliction
of expiring far from the places of their birth. I am more guilty than
any other, for I see it, and yet I act like all the rest; but my only
excuse is that I cannot prevent the catastrophe. I repeat, wo to them
who call in foreigners against their country, and trust in them.’

“How oracular these last words! Facts would have speedily convinced us
of their truth, had we been less infatuated, or had the multitude been
capable of reasoning and acting with propriety; but we were destined to
enrich history with one of those lessons that are most entitled to the
meditation of mankind. We might be estimated at 20 or 25,000 men under
arms; and certainly, such a force, filled with ardour and devotion,
fighting for its own interests, maintaining an understanding with the
sympathetic elements of the interior, acting against a nation, shaken to
its foundation and convulsed by the agitation of new rights, not yet
established and but imperfectly understood, might be capable of striking
decisive blows. But it was not upon our strength, our success, our
activity, that the foreigners relied for the attainment of their views.
Accordingly, under the pretence of employing that influence and of
directing its operation, as they said, against several points at once,
they annihilated us by parcelling out our numbers, and by making, as it
were, prisoners of us in the middle of their different corps. In this
way, 6000 of us, under the Prince of Condé, were marched against Alsace;
4000, under the Duke of Bourbon were to act in Flanders, and from 12 to
15,000 continued in the centre, under command of the King’s two
brothers, to co-operate in the invasion of Champagne.

“It had been the plan and wish of our Princes, that Monsieur, as heir to
the crown and the natural representative of Louis XVI., should, on
account of his captivity, proclaim himself Regent of the kingdom, the
moment he set foot on the French territory; that he should march with
his emigrants at the head of the expedition, and that the allies, in his
rear, should be considered only as auxiliaries. But the allies treated
the plan with derision, and confined us to a station at their tail,
under the orders and at the will and pleasure of the Generalissimo,
Brunswick, who caused us to be preceded by the most absurd of
manifestoes; from the ridicule and odium of which, however, he at least
saved us.

“It is but just, however, to acknowledge that this treatment had not
escaped the foresight of some experienced and better advised heads among
us. They had accordingly suggested, it was said, in the Council of the
Princes, that we should throw ourselves, before the arrival of the
allies, on some point of France, and maintain a civil war there by
ourselves. Others more desperate, or more ardent, were of opinion that
we should nobly seize upon the states of the Elector of Treves, our
benefactor; occupy the town and fortress of Coblentz, and establish
there a central rallying point, or point of support, independent of the
Germanic body; and when we exclaimed against such perfidy and
ingratitude, their answer was:—‘Desperate evils called for desperate
remedies.’ It is impossible to say what might have been the result of
such resolutions, which were, however, more consistent with the bold
spirit of enterprize, that characterizes the present times, than with
the state of manners as they then existed. They were, therefore,
unattended to, and besides, the opportunity had slipped by; we were too
closely involved in the midst of foreigners; we were already in their
power, and our destiny was to be fulfilled!...

“As for us who formed the multitude, we were far from foreseeing the
calamities that were to attend us. We began our march in high spirits.
There was not one of us who did not expect to be, in a fortnight from
that moment, at home, triumphant in the midst of his submissive,
humiliated, and increased vassals. Our confidence would not have endured
a single observation or doubt upon that head. Of this I am about to give
an instance, which though personal and very trifling in itself, will not
be the less characteristic with respect to us all. We were marching
through the city of Treves; one of my granduncles had, during the war of
the succession, been Governor for Louis XIV. while we retained
possession of it. I went to see his tomb, which is in a chapel,
belonging to the Carthusians of that town. The ardour of my youth and
the emotion of the moment determined me to erect a small monument to his
memory, with a superb inscription, suitable to the circumstances. I
entertained no doubt of executing my wish. The good friars were of a
different way of thinking; the prior wished me to arrange the matter
with the Abbé, a kind of bishop, and of German bishop. His reserve and
coldness, in spite of his numerous coats of arms, prepossessed me very
much against him, when I communicated my chivalrous project; but when,
after some circumlocution, he declared that under the present
circumstances ... prudence,—discretion,—if the French were to enter the
place—At these last words, my indignation was extreme; it was such that
I did not wait to utter a single word in reply. I instantly hurried
away, with a mingled laugh of contempt and anger, convinced that I had
left the most horrible Jacobin in existence behind me; and nothing but
my natural generosity and respect for my own character could have
prevented me calling in my comrades, who would have certainly pulled
down the chapel. But alas! the abbot saw farther than I did! Three weeks
had not elapsed before the republicans were in Treves, the poor abbé put
to flight, and the ashes of my good uncle profaned by the infidels.

“But no sooner were we in full operation, no sooner had we set foot on
French ground, than it became no difficult matter, except in cases of
downright stupidity and blindness, to comprehend that it actually might
be just possible that we had been the dupes of our own folly. We found
ourselves in the midst of the Prussians, who fettered all our movements;
we could not take a step in advance, to the right or to the left,
without their permission, and they never granted it. Our subsistence,
all our resources, depended solely upon their will; we had the shame of
appearing as slaves on the soil where we aspired to reign.

“As for our countrymen, instead of receiving us as their deliverers, as
we had been convinced they would, they only gave us proofs of dislike
and aversion. With the exception of a few country gentlemen or others
who joined us, the whole mass of the population fled at our approach; we
were treated as enemies, with the look of reproach and the stern silence
of reprobation. They seemed to say to us: ‘Do you not shudder then at
thus staining your country’s soil? Are you not Frenchmen by birth? Do
your hearts then make no appeal to you in favour of your native land?
You say you are wronged; but what wrong, what injury ever gave to a son
the right or the wish to tear open the bosom of his mother?... We are
told that in ancient times a fiery patrician, Coriolanus, was infamous
enough to fight against his country, but he had at least the merit of
uniting elevated sentiments with his furious passion; he came forward
with a victorious arm; he imposed his own conditions; _he_ was not
dragged along at the tail of barbarous foreigners; he commanded them,
and he also suffered himself to be moved to compassion. Can you be
unsusceptible of that tenderness, and do you not tremble at our
maledictions, which will be perpetuated on you by our children? At any
rate, whatever may be your success, it will not equal your
mortifications! You pretend to come for the purpose of governing, and
you will have brought your masters with you.’

“At Verdun and at Estain, we were quartered in the town. Some of my
comrades and myself were lodged in a handsome house, but all the
furniture and all the proprietors had disappeared, with the exception of
two very pretty young ladies, who put us in possession of it. This last
circumstance seemed a favourable omen, we took the opportunity of
remarking it to them, and were desirous of ingratiating ourselves by our
politeness and attentions. ‘Gentlemen,’ said one of the two amazons in
rather a sharp tone, ‘we have remained, because we have felt that we had
the courage to tell you, face to face, that our lovers are in arms
against you, and that they have our prayers at least as much as our
hearts.’ This was intelligible language; we wished for no more of it,
and even shifted our quarters to another house.

“Be it as it may, we were at length in France, and in the rear of that
Prussian army, which pushed forward its brilliant successes, leaving us
three or four marches behind. And, whether their object was to turn us
into ridicule, because we had assured them that all the towns would
throw open their gates on our appearance, or to rid themselves of our
importunities, they charged us with the siege of Thionville. We made our
approaches, and, by a fantastical singularity, the marine corps found
itself precisely opposed to the national volunteers of Brest. When they
recognised each other, it is impossible to describe the volley of
invectives and insults that was instantly exchanged.

“Thionville is, however, as it is known, one of the strongest places,
and we found the reduction of it impossible with our limited means, for
we were in want of every thing; and it absolutely required an important
negociation to obtain two 24-pounders from the Austrians at Luxembourg.
After a great deal of solicitation and hesitation, the two pieces were
at length brought in triumph, and it was with this formidable train,
that we summoned the place, and fired at night, in pure waste of powder,
some hundreds of cannon shot. On my return from emigration, having
fallen by chance into company with General de Wimphen, who commanded the
fortress, he asked me, ‘what could have been our intention, or the
meaning of the jest we had thus attempted to play off?’ ‘It was done, I
believe,’ said I, ‘because reliance was placed upon you.’ ‘But even had
that been the case,’ said he, ‘you still ought to have furnished me with
an excuse for surrendering; you could not expect that I should solicit
you to attack me.’ Every thing was on a proportionate scale: the
slightest sally spread confusion through all our forces; the most
trifling circumstance was an event with us; the cause was obvious; we
were unacquainted with every thing, and accordingly, setting courage
aside, I do not scruple to believe that a hundred picked men of the
Imperial guard would have routed the whole of our army. Happily, our
adversaries were as ignorant as ourselves, all were pigmies then,
although in a very short time giants were found every where.

“Meanwhile we were extremely discontented with all this, under our
tents, and on our wretched straw; but _à la Française_, we found relief
in our gaiety; our ill humour evaporated in puns and jests. All our
principal officers had nicknames, there was not one, even to our
Commander in Chief, the venerable Marshal de Broglie, who escaped us,
and this puts me in mind of a circumstance, which gave rise to a
nickname for one of his lieutenants, which he never got rid of. Should
any of my comrades in the field ever read this, it may even now excite a
laugh.

“At the moment of a sally, which, as usual, made us very uneasy, every
one pressed forward. We had two small pieces of cannon, which we had
bought, and which, for want of horses, were drawn by the officers of
artillery themselves.” “Well!” observed the Emperor, “I might myself
have been attached to these very pieces, and yet what different
combinations in our destinies and in those of the world! For it is
incontestable that I have given an impulse and direction to it,
emanating solely from myself. But go on.”

“Sire, our two small pieces were rolling along the highway, when the
general officer of the day arrived at full gallop, and stopped with
indignation at the sight of our little cannon, as they were drawn
towards the fortress, breech foremost.—‘How’, exclaimed he, ‘are these
really gentlemen, who draw their cannon in this manner against the
enemy? And, if he were actually to present himself, how could you
contrive to fire upon him?’ He persisted in his blunder, refusing to
comprehend what the officers of artillery strove by every possible means
to explain; that such was the mode of proceeding every where, and that,
unless he had some new invention to communicate, there was no other mode
to be adopted. From that moment we dubbed him by a nickname, by which he
soon became universally known.

“But all this burlesque was soon exchanged for what was serious in the
extreme; the scene shifted, as it were by magic, and our misfortunes
burst upon us in an instant. Whether from treachery, weakness, political
interest, or sickness in his army, from the real superiority of force,
or the mere dexterity of the French general, the King of Prussia entered
into secret negotiation with him, suddenly faced about, and, marching to
the frontier, evacuated the French territory. A most dreadful storm now
burst over our heads; words are inadequate to express the scandalous
treatment we experienced, as well as the just indignation, which could
not fail to animate every generous heart against our allies, the
Prussians. Our Princes degraded, disavowed, insulted, by them; our
equipages, our most necessary effects, even our linen, plundered; our
persons ill-used: and thus we were basely driven and thrust beyond the
frontiers by our friends, our allies!!!

“For my part, sinking under the fatigue of too long marches in the mud,
and under torrents of rain; bending under a musquet and a load of
accoutrements, which did harm to no one but to myself, I took advantage
of my privilege as a volunteer, to leave the ranks, and effect my
retreat as well as I could. I proceeded as occasion served; I never
sought the common halting place; I took refuge in the nearest farm-yard,
and whether it was my own peculiar good fortune, or because the peasants
were in reality kind and not exasperated against us, I passed the
frontier without any unlucky accident. It was not until some time
afterwards that I was enabled to form a correct estimate of the whole
extent of the danger to which I had exposed myself, when I read, in the
papers, that from fifteen to eighteen of us, stragglers like myself, and
some of whom stood near me in the ranks, had been seized, dragged to
Paris, and executed in public, in a kind of auto-da-fé, and, as it were,
by way of expiation.

“As soon as we were out of France, we received notice to disband, but
the intimation was superfluous, for that measure was rendered absolutely
indispensable by our wants, and the privation of every necessary. We
dispersed, each taking his own way at random, with despair and rage for
our companions. We travelled as fugitives, the greater part of the time
on foot, and some almost naked, over the scenes of our past splendour
and luxury; happy when the doors were not shut in our faces, when we did
not receive a brutal repulse! In a moment, we were officially driven
from every quarter; we were prohibited from residing in, or from
entering, all the neighbouring states; we were compelled to take refuge
in distant countries, and to exhibit, throughout Europe, the spectacle
of our miseries, which ought to have been a grand moral and political
lesson to the people, to the great, and to Kings.

“The exploits of the French exacted, however, from foreigners, a cruel
expiation of the indignities with which they overwhelmed us; whilst, on
our part, we experienced a kind of consolation in seeing the honour of
the emigration take refuge in the army of Condé, which displayed itself
to public view, and inscribed itself in history, as a model of loyalty,
valour, and constancy.

“Such, Sire, is that too celebrated era, that fatal determination,
which, with respect to a great number, can be considered only as the
delusion of youth and inexperience. None, however, but themselves,
possess the right of reproaching them with the error. The sentiments by
which they were actuated were so pure, so natural, so generous, that
they might even, were it necessary, derive honour from them; and these
dispositions, I must say, belonged to the mass of which we consisted,
and more particularly to that crowd of country gentlemen, who,
sacrificing all and expecting nothing, without fortune as well as
without hope, displayed a devotion truly heroic, because its only aim
was the performance of duties which they held to be sacred. In other
respects, our defect lay in our political education, which did not teach
us to distinguish our duties, and made us dedicate to the Prince alone
what belonged to the country at large. Accordingly, in future times,
when hostile passions shall be extinct, when no traces shall be left of
jarring interests or of party infatuation and fury, what was doubtful
with us will be positive and clear to others; what was excusable or even
allowable in us, who were situated between an ancient order of things
that was on the point of terminating, and a new one that was about to
commence, will be considered highly culpable in those possessing
established doctrines. Among them, the following will be held as
articles of faith:—1st. That the greatest of all crimes is the
introduction of a foreign power into the heart of one’s country. 2ndly.
That the sovereignty cannot be erratic, but that it is inseparable from
the territory, and remains attached to the mass of the citizens. 3rdly.
That the country cannot be transported abroad; but that it is immutable
and entire on the sacred soil which has given us birth, and which
contains the bones of our ancestors. Such are the grand maxims, and many
others besides, which will remain the offspring of our emigration; such
the great truths, which will be collected from our calamities!”

“Very well!” exclaimed the Emperor, “very well! This is what is called
being free from prejudices! These are really philosophical views! And it
will be said of you, that you were enabled to convert to your advantage
the lessons of time and adversity.”

“Sire, during our stay on board the Northumberland, and the leisure
hours of our passage, the English alluded more than once to this
delicate topic. Misled by the war, which they had carried on with fury
against us, as well as by the maxims with which the interest of the
moment filled their journals, even in opposition to their national
doctrines, they conversed about the merits of the emigration, and the
virtues they had witnessed: and condemned the nation for having resisted
it. But when the arguments became too complicated, or we were desirous
of putting a sudden stop to them, we gained our point with a single
word. We merely said to them:—‘Go back to the period of your own
Revolution; imagine James II. threatening you from the opposite shore
and under French banners: although surrounded by faithful subjects, what
would you have done? And if Louis XIV. had brought him back to London at
the head of 50,000 French, who should have afterwards maintained
garrisons in your country, what would have been your feelings?’—‘Ah!...
But ... Ah!...’ they exclaimed, endeavouring to find out some
difference, but not being able to discover it, they laughed, and were
silent.” “And in fact,” said the Emperor, “there was not a word to be
said in reply.”

He then began to review, with his accustomed rapidity and talent, the
different subjects I had noticed, and stopped to reflect on the
absurdity, the inconsistency, the great mistake of our emigration, and
the real injuries that it had done to France, to the King, and to
ourselves. “You have established, and consecrated in political France,”
he observed, “a separation similar to that which the Catholics and
Protestants introduced into religious Europe; and to what calamities has
it not given rise! I had succeeded in destroying its results, but are
they not on the point of being revived?” He next developed the means
which he had employed to annihilate that plague, the precautions he had
been forced to adopt, and the effects which he had in view. How every
thing that fell from his tongue was changed in appearance!—how every
thing seemed magnified in my eyes in proportion as he discussed the
subject! “And,” he remarked, “a peculiar singularity in my situation was
that in the whole of those transactions I held the helm myself
constantly in the midst of rocks. Every one, judging according to his
own standard, attributed to passion, to simple prejudice, or to
littleness, what in me, however, was but the consequence of profound
views, of grand conceptions, and the most elevated state maxims. It
might have been said that I reigned only over pigmies with respect to
intellectual talent. I was comprehended by none. The national party felt
only jealousy and resentment at what they saw me do in favour of the
emigrants, and the latter, on their part, were persuaded that I sought
only to gain lustre by their assistance. Poor creatures!...

“I obtained, however, my object, in spite of reciprocal infatuation and
prejudice, and I had the satisfaction of leaving every thing quiet in
port, when I launched out to sea in prosecution of my grand
enterprises.”

Having mentioned, since my return to Europe, these expressions of
Napoleon’s to a great Officer of the Crown, who had often the honour of
conversing with him in private (Le Comte de S——), he related to me, in
his turn, a conversation precisely on the same subject. Its coincidence
with what has been just read is so very striking as to induce me to
insert it here. The Emperor said to him one day: “What, think you, is my
reason for endeavouring to have about me the great names of the ancient
monarchy?”—“Perhaps, Sire, for the splendour of your throne, and for the
purpose of keeping up certain appearances in the eyes of Europe.”—“Ah!
That is just like you, with your pride and your prejudices of rank! Well
then, learn, that my victories and my power are much better
recommendations for me in Europe than all your great names, and that my
apparent predilection for them does me a great deal of injury, and
renders me very unpopular at home. You attribute to narrow views what
arise from most extensive ones. I am engaged in renovating a society, a
nation, and the elements that I am obliged to employ are hostile to each
other. The nobility and the emigrants are but a point in the mass, and
that mass is inimical to them, and continues very much exasperated
against them; it hardly forgives me for having recalled them. For my own
part, I considered it as a duty: but if I suffer them to continue as a
body, they may one day be serviceable to foreign powers, prove injurious
to us, and subject themselves to great dangers. My object, then, is to
dissolve their union, and to render them independent of each other. If I
place some of them about my person, in the different branches of
administration, and in the army, it is for the purpose of consolidating
them with the mass, and of managing so as to reduce all classes into a
whole; for I am mortal, and if I should happen to leave you before that
fusion is accomplished, you would soon see what disasters would arise
from these heterogeneous parts, and the dreadful dangers of which
certain persons might become the victims! Thus, then, Sir, my views are
all connected with humanity and elevated political considerations, and,
in no respect, with vain and silly prejudices.”

When I observed to the person who related this anecdote, how little we
were acquainted at the Tuileries with Napoleon’s real character, and the
great and excellent qualities of his soul and heart, he answered that,
for his own part, he had been personally more fortunate, and that he
would give me a proof of it, which he selected out of ten: “The Emperor
shewed himself, one day, in his Privy Council, very much incensed
against General La F——, whom he attacked with great severity, and whose
opinions and principles, he said, were capable of effecting the complete
dissolution of a state: becoming animated by degrees, he at length put
himself into a real passion. I was present as a member of the Council; I
had been recently admitted, and was little accustomed to the Emperor’s
manners, and, although stopped by the two members placed next to me, I
undertook to speak in defence of the accused, asserting that he had been
calumniated to the Sovereign, and that he lived quietly on his estate,
with personal opinions which were productive of no ill effect whatever.
The Emperor, still in a passion, resumed the charge for the purpose of
pressing it with vehemence; but after five or six words, he stopped
short, and addressing himself to me, said: ‘But he is your friend, Sir,
and you are right. I had forgotten that.—Let us speak of something
else.’ ‘And why,’ I asked, ‘did you not make us acquainted with all this
at the time?’—By a fatality which would seem to belong to Napoleon’s
atmosphere, whether from prejudice or otherwise, the impression on our
minds was that it could only be told to his intimate friends; for
whoever had said much about it would only have passed for a clumsy
romancer of a courtier, who told not what he believed to be true, but
what he conceived best suited to obtain favour and rewards.”

Since I have mentioned this great Officer of the Crown, who is no less
distinguished by the graces of his mind and the amenity of his manners
than by his exalted character, I shall notice one of his answers to
Napoleon, remarkable for its ingenious and delicate flattery. The
Emperor, at one of his levees, having been obliged to wait some time for
his appearance, attacked him on his arrival, openly, in the presence of
all. It happened to be precisely at the time when five or six Kings (and
among others, those of Bavaria, Saxony, and Wurtemberg), were at Paris.
“Sire,” replied the culprit, “I have, no doubt, a million of excuses to
make to your Majesty, but at this time, one is not at perfect liberty to
go through the streets as one pleases. I just now had the misfortune to
get into a _crowd of kings_, from which I found it impossible to
extricate myself sooner. This, Sire, was the cause of my delay.” Every
one smiled, and the Emperor contented himself with saying, in a softened
tone of voice: “Whatever, Sir, may be the cause, take proper precautions
for the future, and above all, never make me wait again.”

             NAPOLEON’S SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY.—PUBLIC SPIRIT
               OF THE TIME.—EVENTS OF THE 10TH OF AUGUST.

3rd.—The weather is somewhat improved; the Emperor attempted to take a
walk in the garden. General Bingham and the Colonel of the 53d requested
to see the Emperor, who kept them rather long. The appearance of the
Governor put us all to flight. General Bingham disappeared, and, for our
part, we went to the wood, for the purpose of keeping away from the
spot.

The Emperor, during his walk, conversed a great deal about a journey
which he took to Burgundy in the beginning of the Revolution. This he
calls his _Sentimental Journey_ to Nuitz. He supped there with his
comrade Gassendi, at that time captain in the same regiment, and who was
advantageously married to the daughter of a physician of the place. The
young traveller soon remarked the difference of political opinion
between the father and son-in-law; Gassendi, the gentleman, was, of
course, an aristocrat, and the physician a flaming patriot. The latter
found in the strange guest a powerful auxiliary, and was so delighted
with him that the following day at dawn he paid him a visit of
acknowledgment and sympathy. The appearance of a young officer of
artillery, with good logical reasoning and a ready tongue, was, observed
the Emperor, a valuable and rare accession to the place. It was easy for
the traveller to perceive that he made a favourable impression. It was
Sunday, and hats were taken off to him from one end of the street to the
other. His triumph, however, was not without a check. He went to sup at
the house of a Madame Maret or Muret, where another of his comrades,
V——, seemed to be comfortably established. Here the aristocracy of the
canton were accustomed to meet, although the mistress was but the wife
of a wine-merchant, but she had great property and the most polished
manners; she was, said the Emperor, the duchess of the place. All the
gentlefolks of the vicinity were to be found there. The young officer
was caught, as he remarked, in a real wasp-nest, and it was necessary
for him to fight his way out again. The contest was unequal. In the very
heat of the action, the mayor was announced. “I believed him to be an
assistant sent to me by Heaven in the critical moment, but he was the
worst of all my opponents. I see this villanous fellow now before me in
his fine Sunday clothes, fat and bloated, in an ample scarlet coat; he
was a miserable animal. I was happily extricated by the generosity of
the mistress of the house, perhaps from a secret sympathy of opinion.
She unceasingly parried with her wit the blows which were dealt at me;
and was a protecting shield on which the enemy’s weapons struck in vain.
She guarded me from every kind of wound, and I have always retained a
pleasing recollection of the services I received from her in that sort
of skirmish.

“The same diversity of opinions,” said the Emperor, “was then to be met
with in every part of France. In the saloons, in the streets, on the
highways, in the taverns, every one was ready to take part in the
contest, and nothing was easier than for a person to form an erroneous
estimate of the influence of parties and opinions, according to the
local situation in which he was placed. Thus a patriot might easily be
deceived, when in the saloons, or among an assembly of officers, where
the majority was decidedly against him; but, the instant he was in the
street, or among the soldiers, he found himself in the midst of the
entire nation. The sentiments of the day succeeded even in making
proselytes among the officers themselves, particularly after the
celebrated oath to the Nation, the Law, and the King. Until that time,”
continued the Emperor, “had I received an order to point my cannon
against the people, I have no doubt, that custom, prejudice, education,
and the name of the King, would have induced me to obey; but, the
national oath once taken, this would have ceased, and I should have
acknowledged the nation only. My natural propensities thenceforth
harmonized with my duties, and happily accorded with all the metaphysics
of the Assembly. The patriotic officers, however, it must be allowed,
constituted but the smaller number; but with the soldiers, as a lever,
they led the regiment and imposed the law. The comrades of the opposite
party, and the officers themselves, had recourse to us in every critical
moment. I remember, for instance, having rescued from the fury of the
populace a brother officer, whose crime consisted in singing from the
windows of our dining-room the celebrated ballad _O Richard! O mon Roi!_
I had little notion then that that air would one day be proscribed in
the same manner on my account. Just so, on the 10th of August, when I
saw the palace of the Tuileries stormed and the person of the King
seized, I was certainly very far from thinking that I should replace
him, and that that palace would be my place of residence.”

In dwelling upon the events of the 10th of August, he said: “I was,
during that horrible epoch, at Paris, in lodgings in the Rue du Mail,
Place des Victoires. On hearing the sound of the tocsin, and the news of
the assault upon the Tuileries, I ran to the Carousel, to the house of
Fauvelet, the brother of Bourrienne, who kept an upholsterer’s shop. He
had been my comrade at the military school of Brienne. It was from that
house, which, by the by, I was never afterwards able to find, in
consequence of the great alterations made there, that I had a good view
of all the circumstances of the attack. Before I reached the Carousel, I
had been met by a group of hideous-looking men, carrying a head at the
end of a pike. Seeing me decently dressed, with the look of a gentleman,
they called upon me to shout _Vive la Nation!_ which, as it may be
easily believed, I did without hesitation.

“The palace was attacked by the vilest rabble. The King had
unquestionably for his defence as many troops as the Convention
afterwards had on the 13th Vendémiaire, and the enemies of the latter
were much better disciplined and more formidable. The greater part of
the national guard shewed themselves favourable to the King; this
justice is due to them.”

Here the Grand Marshal observed “that he actually belonged to one of the
battalions which manifested the most determined devotion. He was several
times on the point of being massacred as he returned alone to his
residence.” We remarked, on our part, that in general the national guard
of Paris had constantly displayed the virtues of its class; the love of
order, attachment to authority, the dread of plunder, and the
detestation of anarchy; and that also was the Emperor’s opinion.

“The palace being forced, and the King having repaired to the Assembly,”
continued he, “I ventured to penetrate into the garden. Never since has
any of my fields of battle given me the idea of so many dead bodies, as
I was impressed with by the heaps of the Swiss; whether the smallness of
the place seemed to increase the number, or because it was the result of
the first impression I ever received of that kind. I saw well dressed
women commit the grossest indecencies on the dead bodies of the Swiss. I
went through all the coffee-houses in the neighbourhood of the Assembly;
the irritation was every where extreme; fury was in every heart and
shewed itself in every countenance, although the persons thus enflamed
were far from belonging to the class of the populace; and all these
places must necessarily have been frequented daily by the same visitors:
for, although I had nothing particular in my dress, or perhaps it was
because my countenance was more calm, it was easy for me to perceive
that I excited many hostile and distrustful looks, as some one who was
unknown or suspected.”

MASKED BALLS.—MADAME DE MÉGRIGNY.—PIEDMONT AND THE PIEDMONTESE.—CANALS
  OF FRANCE.—PLANS RESPECTING PARIS.—VERSAILLES.—FONTAINEBLEAU, &C.

4th.—The weather was much improved. The Emperor ordered his calash, and
walked a good way until it took him up.

The conversation turned upon masked balls, which the Emperor was
peculiarly fond of and frequently ordered. He was then always sure of a
certain meeting which never failed to take place. He was, he said,
regularly accosted every year by the same mask, who reminded him of old
intimacies, and ardently entreated to be received and admitted at Court.
The mask was a most amiable, kind, and beautiful woman, to whom many
persons were certainly much indebted. The Emperor, who continued to love
her, always answered;—“I do not deny that you are charming, but reflect
a little upon your situation; be your own judge and decide. You have two
or three husbands, and children by several of your lovers. It would have
been thought a happiness to have shared in the first fault; the second
would have caused pain, but still it might be pardoned; but the
sequel—and then, and then!... Fancy yourself the Emperor and judge; what
would you do in my place, I who am bound to revive and maintain a
certain decorum.” The beautiful suitor either did not reply, or
said:—“At least do not deprive me of hope;” and deferred her claims of
happiness to the following year. And each of us,” said the Emperor, “was
punctual at the new meeting.”

The Emperor took great pleasure in getting himself insulted at these
balls. He laughed heartily at the house of Cambacérès one day, on being
told by a Madame de St. D——, “that there were people at the ball who
ought to be turned out, and that they certainly could not have got
admittance without stolen tickets.”

Another time, he forced the tender and timid Madame de Mégrigny to rise
and retire in anger, and with tears in her eyes, complaining that the
freedom, allowed at a masked ball, had, in her case, been sadly abused.
The Emperor had just put her in mind of a very remarkable favour, which
he had formerly granted to her, and added that every one supposed she
had paid for it by granting him the lord’s right. “But there was,” said
the Emperor, “nobody but myself who could say so, without insulting her;
because, although such was the report, I was certain of its falsehood.”
The following is an account of the circumstance.

When the Emperor was on his way to be crowned at Milan, he slept at
Troyes. The authorities were presented to him; and with them was a young
lady, on the point of being married, with a petition, intreating his
protection and assistance. As the Emperor was, besides, desirous of
doing something which might produce a good effect, and prove agreeable
to the country, the circumstance appeared favourable, and he took
advantage of it with all imaginable grace. The young lady (Madame de
Mégrigny) belonged to the first families of this province, but had been
completely ruined by the emigration. She had scarcely returned to the
miserable abode of her parents, when a page arrived with the Emperor’s
decree, which put them in possession of an income of 30,000 francs or
more. The effect of such a proceeding may be well imagined. However, as
the young lady was very charming and perfectly handsome, it was decided
that her fascinations had some share in his gallantry, although he left
the town a few hours afterwards, and never thought more of the thing;
but the general opinion was not a jot altered on that account. It is
well known how stories are formed; and as she married one of his
equerries, and had consequently come to Court, all this had been so well
mingled together that, when she was afterwards appointed sub-governess
to the King of Rome, the choice shocked, for a moment, the austere
Madame de Montesquiou, who suspected, said the Emperor, that it was but
a mere arrangement.

The Emperor said that he renewed at Turin, in the person of Madame de
Lascaris, the gracious gallantry exercised at Troyes; and that, in both
instances, he had reason to be gratified with the results of his
liberality. The two families gave proofs of attachment and gratitude.

We enquired what might have been the sentiments of Piedmont with regard
to himself. He had, he said, a particular affection for that province.
M. de Saint-Marsan, on whose fidelity he relied to the end, had assured
him, at the period of our reverses, that the country would shew itself
one of his best provinces.

“In fact,” continued the Emperor, “the Piedmontese do not like to be a
small state; their King was a real feudal lord, whom it was necessary to
court, or to dread: He had more power and authority than I, who, as
Emperor of the French, was but a supreme magistrate, bound to see the
laws executed, and unable to dispense with them. Had I it in my power to
prevent the arrest of a courtier for debt? Could I have put a stop to
the regular action of the laws, no matter upon whom they operated?”

During the conversation at dinner, the Emperor inquired whether the
quantity of river water flowing into the Mediterranean and the Black Sea
had been calculated. This led him to express a wish that a calculation
of the fluvial water of Europe should be made, and that the proportion
contributed by each valley and each stream, should be ascertained. He
regretted much that he had not proposed this series of scientific
questions. This was, he observed, his grand system. Did any useful,
curious or interesting idea suggest itself to him: “I proposed, at my
levees, or in my familiar communications, analogous questions to my
Members of the Institute, with orders to resolve them. The solution
became the subject of public inquiry; it was analyzed, contested,
adopted or rejected; and there is nothing which cannot be accomplished
in this way. It is the grand lever of improvement for a great nation,
possessing a great deal of intelligence, and a great deal of knowledge.”

The Emperor also observed on this subject, that geography had never been
so successfully cultivated as at present, and that his expeditions had
contributed somewhat to its improvement. He afterwards noticed the
canals, which he had caused to be made in France, and particularly
mentioned that from Strasburg to Lyons, in which, he hoped sufficient
progress had been made to induce others to complete it. He thought that,
out of thirty millions, twenty-four must have been already expended.

“Communications are now established in the interior from Bordeaux to
Lyons and Paris. I had constructed a great number of canals, and
projected a great many more.” One of us having observed that a proposal
for the construction of a very useful canal had been submitted to the
Emperor, but that measures had been taken to deceive him, for the
purpose of preventing his acceptance of the offer: “Without doubt,” said
the Emperor, “the plan must have appeared advantageous only on paper;
but I suppose it would have been necessary to advance money, which was
drawn from me with difficulty.”—No, Sire, the refusal was but the effect
of an intrigue. Your Majesty was deceived.”—“It was impossible, with
respect to such a subject. You speak without sufficient
information.”—“But I am confident of it. I was acquainted with the plan,
the offers and the subscribers; my relations had put down their names
for considerable sums. The object was the union of the Meuse with the
Marne. The length of the canal would have been less than seven
leagues.”—“But you do not tell us all; it was, perhaps, required that I
should grant immense national forests in the environs, which I should
not have agreed to.”—“No, Sire, the whole was an intrigue of your Board
of Bridges and Roads.”—“But even then, it was necessary for them to
allege some reasons, some appearance of public interest. What reasons
did they assign?”—“Sire, that the profits would have been too
considerable.”—“But in that case the plan ought to have been submitted
to me in person, and I would have carried it into execution. I repeat,
that you are not justified by the facts; you are speaking now to a man
upon the very subject which constantly engaged his attention. The Board
of Bridges and Roads were, on their part, never better pleased than when
they were employed. There never was an individual who proposed the
construction of a bridge that was not taken at his word. If he asked for
a toll for twenty-five years, I was disposed to grant him one for
thirty. If it cost me nothing, it was a matter of indifference whether
it would prove useful. It was still a capital with which I enriched the
soil. Instead of rejecting proposals for canals, I eagerly courted them.
But, my dear Sir, there are no two things that resemble each other so
little as the conversation of a saloon, and the consideration of an
Administrative Council. The projector is always right in a saloon; his
projects would be magnificent and infallible, if he were listened to,
and if he can, by some little contrivance, but connect the refusal under
which he suffers with some bottles of wine, with some intrigue carried
on by a wife or a mistress, the romance is complete, and that is what
you probably heard. But an Administrative Council is not to be managed
so, because it comes to no decision but on facts and accurate
measurement. What is the canal you mentioned? I cannot be unacquainted
with it.”—“Sire, from the Meuse to the Marne, a distance of seven
leagues only.”—“Very well! my dear Sir, it is from the Meuse to the
Aisne you mean, and it would have been less than seven leagues. I shall
soon recollect all about it; there is, however, but one little
difficulty to overcome, and that is that at this very instant it is
doubtful whether the project be practicable. There, as in other places,
Hippocrates says _yes_, and Galen says _no_. Tarbé maintained that it
was impossible, and denied that there was a sufficiency of water at the
point where it was to commence. I repeat, that you are speaking to him,
who, of all others was the most attentive to these objects, more
especially in the environs of Paris. It was the constant subject of my
thoughts to render Paris the real capital of Europe. I sometimes wished
it, for instance, to become a city with a population of two, three, or
four millions, in short, something fabulous, colossal, unexampled until
our days, and with public establishments suitable to its population.”

Some one having then observed that, if Heaven had allowed the Emperor to
reign sixty years, as it had Louis XIV., he would have left many grand
monuments: “Had Heaven but granted me twenty years, and a little more
leisure,” resumed the Emperor with vivacity, “ancient Paris would have
been sought for in vain; not a trace of it would have been left, and I
should have changed the face of France. Archimedes promised to do any
thing, provided he had a resting place for his lever; I should have done
as much, wherever I could have found a point of support for my energy,
my perseverance, and my budgets; a world might be created with budgets.
I should have displayed the difference between a constitutional Emperor
and a King of France. The Kings of France have never possessed any
administrative or municipal institution. They have merely shown
themselves great Lords who were ruined by their men of business.

“The nation itself has nothing in its character and its tastes but what
is transitory and perishable. Every thing is done for the gratification
of the moment and of caprice, nothing for duration.... That is our
motto, and it is exemplified by our manners in France. Every one passes
his life in doing and undoing; nothing is ever left behind. Is it not
unbecoming that Paris should not possess even a French theatre, or an
Opera house, in any respect worthy of its high claims?

“I have often set myself against the feasts which the city of Paris
wished to give me. They consisted of dinners, balls, artificial
fire-works, at an expense of four, six, or eight hundred thousand
francs; the preparations for which obstructed the public for several
days, and which afterwards cost as much for their removal as they had
for their construction. I proved that, with these idle expenses, they
might have erected lasting and magnificent monuments.

“One must have gone through as much as I have, in order to be acquainted
with all the difficulty of doing good. If the business related to
chimneys, partitions, and furniture for some individuals in the imperial
palaces, the work was quickly accomplished; but if it was necessary to
lengthen the garden of the Tuileries, to render some quarters wholesome,
to cleanse some sewers, and to perform a task beneficial to the public,
in which particular persons had no direct interest, I found it requisite
to exert all the energy of my character, to write six, ten letters a
day, and to get into a downright passion. It was in this way that I laid
out as much as thirty millions in sewers, for which no body will ever
thank me. I pulled down a property worth seventeen millions in houses in
front of the Tuileries, for the purpose of forming the Carousel, and
throwing open the Louvre. What I did is immense; what I had resolved to
do and what I had projected was much more so.”

A person then remarked that the Emperor’s labours had not been limited
either to Paris or to France, but that almost every city in Italy
exhibited traces of his creative powers. Wherever one travelled, at the
foot as well as on the top of the Alps, in the sands of Holland, on the
banks of the Rhine, Napoleon, always Napoleon, was to be seen.

In consequence of this remark, he observed that he had determined on
draining the Pontine marshes. “Cæsar,” he said, “was about to undertake
it, when he perished.” Then reverting to France; “The kings, he said,
had too many country-houses and useless objects. Any impartial historian
will be justified in blaming Louis XIV. for his excessive and idle
expenditure at Versailles, involved as he was in wars, taxes, and
calamities. He exhausted himself for the purpose of forming after all
but a bastard town.” The Emperor then analyzed the advantages of an
administrative city, that is to say, calculated for the union of the
different branches of administration, and they seemed to him truly
problematical.

The Emperor did not conceal his opinion that the capital was not, at
times, a fit residence for the sovereign; but, in another point of view,
Versailles was not suitable to the great, the ministers, and the
courtiers. Louis XIV. therefore committed a blunder, if he undertook to
build Versailles solely for the residence of the kings, when Saint
Germain was, in every respect, ready for the purpose; Nature seemed to
have made it expressly for the real residence of the kings of France.
Napoleon himself had committed faults in that respect: for it was not
right he said to praise himself for all that had been done in this way.
He ought, for instance, to have given up Compiegne, and he regretted
having celebrated his marriage there instead of selecting Fontainebleau.
“That,” said he, referring to Fontainebleau, “is the real abode of
kings, the house of ages; it is not, perhaps, strictly speaking, an
architectural palace; but it is, unquestionably, well calculated and
perfectly suitable. It was certainly the most commodious and the most
happily situated in Europe for a sovereign.”

He then took a review of the capitals he had visited, of the palaces he
had seen, and claimed a decided superiority in our favour.
Fontainebleau, he further added, was also, at the same time, the most
suitable political and military situation. The Emperor reproached
himself with the sums he had expended on Versailles, but yet it was, he
said, necessary to prevent it from falling into ruin. The demolition of
a considerable part of that palace was a subject of consideration,
during the Revolution; it was proposed to take away the centre, and thus
to separate the two wings. “It would have been of essential service to
me,” he observed; “for nothing is so expensive or so truly useless as
this multitude of palaces: and if, nevertheless, I undertook that of the
King of Rome, it was because I had views peculiar to myself; and
besides, in reality, I never thought of doing more than preparing the
ground. There I should have stopped.[5]

Footnote 5:

  All the world knows, or ought to have known (if, by a fatality,
  altogether peculiar to Napoleon, the greater part of his most
  commendable actions had not been, at the time, stifled under the
  weight of malignity and libels), the history of that miserable hut,
  enclosed within the circuit of the palace of the King of Rome; the
  proprietor of which demanded successively ten, twenty, fifty, and one
  hundred times its real value. When he had reached that ridiculous
  price, the Emperor, whose directions on that point were taken,
  suddenly commanded a stop to be put to the bargain, exclaiming that
  that wretched stall, amidst all the magnificence of the palace of the
  King of Rome, would be, after all, the vineyard of Naboth, the most
  decisive testimony of his justice, the noblest trophy of his reign.

“My errors, in disbursements of this kind, could not, after all, be very
great. They were, thanks to my budgets, observed and necessarily
corrected every year, and could never exceed a small part of the expense
occasioned by the original fault.”

The Emperor assured us that he experienced every possible difficulty in
making his system of budgets intelligible, and in carrying it into
execution. Whenever a plan to the amount of thirty millions, which
suited me, was proposed; Granted, was my answer, but to be completed in
twenty years, that is to say, at a million and a half francs a-year. So
far, all went on very smoothly; but what am I to get, I added, for my
first year? For if my expenditure is to be divided into parts, it is,
however, my determination to have the result, the work, as far as it
goes, entire and complete. In this manner, I wished at first for a
recess, an apartment, no matter what, but something perfect, for my
million and a half of francs. The architects seemed resolved not to
comprehend my meaning; it narrowed their expansive views and their grand
effects. They would, at once, have willingly erected a whole façade,
which must have remained for a long time useless, and thus involved me
in immense disbursements, which, if interrupted, would have swallowed up
every thing.

“It was in this manner, which was peculiar to myself, and in spite of so
many political and military obstacles, that I executed so many
undertakings. I had collected furniture belonging to the Crown, to the
amount of forty millions, and plate worth at least, four millions. How
many palaces have I not repaired? Perhaps, too many; I return to that
subject. Thanks to my mode of acting, I was enabled to inhabit
Fontainebleau within one year after the repairs were begun, and it cost
me no more than 5 or 600,000 francs. If I have since expended six
millions on it, that was done in six years. It would have cost me much
more in the course of time. My principal object was to make the expense
light and imperceptible, and to give durability to the work.

“During my visits to Fontainebleau,” said the Emperor, “from 12 to 1500
persons were invited and lodged, with every convenience; upwards of 3000
might be entertained at dinner, and this cost the Sovereign very little,
in consequence of the admirable order and regularity established by
Duroc. More than twenty or five-and-twenty Princes, Dignitaries, or
Ministers, were obliged to keep their households there.

“I disapproved the building of Versailles; but in my ideas respecting
Paris, and they were occasionally gigantic, I thought of making it
useful and of converting it, in the course of time, into a kind of
fauxbourg, an adjacent site, a point of view from the grand capital;
and, for the purpose of more effectually appropriating it to that end, I
had conceived a plan, of which I had a description sketched out.

“It was my intention to expel from its beautiful groves those nymphs,
the productions of a wretched taste, and those ornaments _à la
Turcaret_, and to replace them by panoramas, in masonry, of all the
capitals, into which we had entered victorious, and of all the
celebrated battles, which had shed lustre on our arms. It would have
been a collection of so many eternal monuments of our triumphs and our
national glory, placed at the gate of the capital of Europe, which
necessarily could not fail of being visited by the rest of the world.”
Here he suddenly left off, and began reading Le Distrait, but he almost
instantly laid it aside, whether from the agitation of his own thoughts,
or from a nervous cough, with which he had, for a short time, been often
affected after dinner. He certainly gets considerably worse, and his
health is altogether declining.

PLAN OF A HISTORY OF EUROPE.—SELIM III.—FORCES OF A TURKISH SULTAN.—THE
  MAMELUKES.—ON THE REGENCY.

5th.—The Emperor did not go out until after five o’clock. He was in
pain, and had taken a bath, where he remained too long, in consequence
of the arrival of Sir H. Lowe, as he would not leave it until the
Governor was gone.

The Emperor had been reading, while in the bath, the Ottoman History, in
two volumes. He had conceived the idea, and regretted that he had been
unable to execute it, of having all the histories of Europe, from the
time of Louis XIV., composed from the documents belonging to our office
for Foreign Affairs, where the regular official reports of all the
ambassadors are deposited.

“My reign,” he observed, “would have been a perfect epoch for that
object. The superiority of France, its independence, and regeneration,
enabled the then government to publish such matters without
inconvenience. It would have been like publishing ancient history.
Nothing could have been more valuable.”

He next adverted to Sultan Selim III., to whom, he said, he once wrote:
“Sultan, come forth from thy seraglio; place thyself at the head of thy
troops, and renew the glorious days of thy monarchy.”

“Selim, the Louis XVI. of the Turks,” said the Emperor, “who was very
much attached and very favourable to us, contented himself with
answering, that the advice would have been excellent for the first
Princes of his dynasty; but that the manners of those times were very
different; and that such a conduct would, at present, be unseasonable,
and altogether useless.”

The Emperor added, however, that nobody knew how to calculate, with
certainty, the energy of the sudden burst, which might be produced by a
Sultan of Constantinople, who was capable of placing himself at the head
of his people, of infusing new spirit into them, and of exciting that
fanatical multitude to action. At a later period, he observed, that, for
his own part, if he had been able to unite the Mamelukes with his
French, he should have considered himself the master of the world. “With
that chosen handful, and the rabble,” he added, with a smile, “recruited
on the spot, to be expended in the hour of need, I know nothing that
could have resisted me. Algiers trembled at it.

“‘But should your Sultan,’ said, one day, the Dey of Algiers to the
French Consul, ‘ever take it into his head to pay us a visit, what
safety could we hope for? For he has defeated the Mamelukes.’ The
Mamelukes,” observed the Emperor, “were, in fact, objects of veneration
and terror throughout the East; they were looked upon as invincible
until our time.”

The Emperor, while waiting for dinner in the midst of us, opened a book,
which lay at his side on the couch; it was the Regency. He stigmatized
it as one of the most abominable eras of our annals: and was vexed that
it had been described with the levity of the age, and not with the
severity of history. It had been strewed with the flowers of fashionable
life, and set off with the colouring of the Graces, instead of having
been treated with rigorous justice. The Regency, he observed, had been,
in reality, the reign of the depravity of the heart, of the libertinism
of the mind, and of the most radical immorality of every species. It was
such, he said, that he believed all the horrors and abominations with
which the manners of the Regent were reproached in the bosom of his own
family; while he did not give credit to the stories told of Louis XV.,
who, although plunged in the foulest and most frightful debauchery,
afforded, however, no grounds to justify his belief in such shocking and
monstrous indulgencies; and he vindicated him very satisfactorily from
certain imputations, which would have seriously affected the person of
one of his (Napoleon’s) former aides-de-camp. He considered the epoch of
the Regent to have been the overthrow of every kind of property, the
destruction of public morals. Nothing had been held sacred either in
manners or in principles. The Regent was personally overwhelmed with
infamy. In the affair of the legitimate Princes, he had exhibited the
most abject baseness, and committed a great abuse of authority. The King
alone could authorize such a decision, and he, the Regent, had felt
pleasure in gratuitously dishonouring himself in the person of his wife,
the natural daughter of Louis XIV., whom he had found it his interest,
however, to marry, while that King was on the throne.

6th.—As we wished to try the tent, which was just finished, the table
was laid there, and we invited the English officers, who had
superintended the work, to breakfast with us.

The Emperor sent for me to his apartment; he dressed himself, and, when
he went out, I accompanied him to the bottom of the wood, where we
walked for some time. He entered into the discussion of some important
subjects.

The Emperor returned to the calash for the purpose of ordering it to be
in readiness, and we resumed our walk, until it took us up. On our
return, the Emperor visited the tent, and said a few words, expressive
of his satisfaction to the officer and seamen who were employed in
putting the last hand to it.

CAMPAIGNS OF ITALY, &C.—EPOCH OF 1815, &C.—GUSTAVUS III.—GUSTAVUS
  IV.—BERNADOTTE.—PAUL I.

7th.—After breakfasting in the tent, the Emperor took a fancy to review
some chapters of the Campaigns in Italy: he sent for my son, whose foot
was at length mending, and whose eyes were much better. He finished the
chapters of Pavia and Leghorn. He afterwards walked towards the bottom
of the wood, having ordered the carriage to follow. On the way, the
Emperor said that he considered the Campaigns of Italy and Egypt as
completely finished, and in a fit state to be given to the public, and
it would, no doubt, he remarked, be a very agreeable present to the
French and Italians; it was the record of their glory and their rights.
He did not think, however, that he ought to put his name to it; and he
repeated that the different epochs of his memoirs would perpetuate those
of his faithful companions.

On the arrival of the calash, the conversation, continuing on the same
subject, he was earnestly pressed to finish 1815; and its importance,
interest, and results, were warmly canvassed. “Very well!” said he, with
a smile, “I must give myself up to it entirely; it is a pleasure to be
encouraged; but it is also requisite to go to work with a proper temper.
We are surfeited here with disgust and trickery; we seem to be envied
the air we breathe.”

He returned to his apartment, and I followed him, when a conversation
peculiarly interesting and remarkable took place. It related to Gustavus
III., to Sweden, to Russia, to Gustavus IV., to Bernadotte, to Paul I.,
&c.

I have said that, at Aix-la-Chapelle, Gustavus III. lived among us as a
private individual under the name of Count de Haga. He constituted the
charm of society, by the vivacity of his wit and the interest he
imparted to his conversation. I had heard from his own mouth his famous
Revolution of 1772, and I was in the happiest situation to obtain a
thorough knowledge of that epoch of the history of Sweden. I was, at the
same time, very well acquainted with a Baron de Sprengporten, who, after
having displayed great zeal for Gustavus, had the misfortune to remove
to Russia, and to return at the head of foreigners to fight against his
country. The consequence was that sentence of death had been passed upon
him in Sweden. He was also at Aix-la-Chapelle at the moment, and had
banished himself from it, out of courtesy, he said, on the arrival of
Gustavus. He had not, however, removed farther off than half a league,
so that all I heard the King say in the evening was controverted,
modified, or confirmed for me the next morning at breakfast by the
Baron. He had enjoyed a very considerable share of that Prince’s
confidence, and he communicated the most numerous and minute
particulars, as positive facts, respecting the romance of the birth of
Gustavus IV., who had been represented as altogether unconnected by
blood with Gustavus III., according to his full knowledge and his own
desire.

The Emperor observed that this same Sprengporten had been actually sent
to him as envoy by Paul, at the time of his Consulate. With respect to
Gustavus IV., he said that that Prince had, on his appearance in the
world, announced himself as a hero, and had terminated his career merely
as a madman, and that he had distinguished himself in his early days by
some very remarkable traits. While yet a boy, he had insulted Catharine
by the refusal of her grand-daughter, at the moment even when that great
Empress seated on her throne, and surrounded by her Court, waited only
for him to celebrate the marriage ceremony.

At a later period, he had insulted Alexander, in no less marked a
manner, by refusing, after Paul’s catastrophe, to suffer one of the new
Emperor’s officers to enter his dominions, and by answering, to the
official complaints addressed to him on this subject, that Alexander
ought not to be displeased that he, Gustavus, who still mourned the
assassination of his father, should shut the entrance of his States
against one of those, accused by the public voice of having immolated
his (Alexander’s).

“On my accession to the sovereignty,” said the Emperor, “he declared
himself my great antagonist; it might have been supposed that nothing
short of renewing the exploits of the great Gustavus Adolphus would have
satisfied him. He ran over the whole of Germany, for the purpose of
stirring up enemies against me. At the time of the catastrophe of the
Duke d’Enghien, he swore to avenge it in person; and at a later period,
he insolently sent back the black eagle to the King of Prussia, because
the latter had accepted my legion of honour.

“His fatal moment at length arrived; a conspiracy, of no common kind,
tore him from the throne and banished him from his country. The
unanimity evinced against him is, no doubt, a proof of the blunders
which he had committed. I am ready to admit that he was inexcusable and
even mad, but it is, notwithstanding, extraordinary and unexampled that,
in that crisis, not a single sword was drawn in his defence, whether
from affection, from gratitude, from virtuous feeling, or even from
stupidity, if you please; and truly, it is a circumstance which does
little honour to the atmosphere of Kings.”

This Prince, tossed about and deceived by the English, who wished to
make him their instrument, and repulsed by his relatives, seemed
determined to renounce the world, and, as if he had felt his existence
disgraced by his contempt of mankind and his disgust at things, he
voluntarily lost himself altogether in the crowd.

The Emperor said that, after the battle of Leipsic, he had been informed
on the part of Gustavus, that he had no doubt been his enemy a long
time; but that, for a long time, he (Napoleon) was of all others the
sovereign of whom he had the least to complain, and that, for a long
time also, his only sentiments with regard to him were those of
admiration and sympathy; that his actual misfortunes permitted him to
express his feelings without restraint; that he offered to be his
Aide-de-camp, and requested an asylum in France.[6] “I was affected,”
observed the Emperor; “but I soon reflected that if I received him, my
dignity would be pledged to make exertions in his favour. Besides, I no
longer ruled the world, and then common minds would not fail to discover
in the interest I took for him, an impotent hatred against Bernadotte;
finally, Gustavus had been dethroned by the voice of the people, and it
was the voice of the people by which I had been elevated. In taking up
his cause, I should have been guilty of inconsistency in my own conduct,
and have acted upon discordant principles. In short, I dreaded lest I
should render affairs more complicated than they were, and silenced my
feelings of generosity. I caused him to be answered that I appreciated
what he offered me, and that I was sensible of it, but that the
political interest of France did not allow me to indulge in my private
feelings, and that it even imposed upon me the painful task of refusing,
for the moment, the asylum which he asked; that he would, however,
greatly deceive himself, if he supposed me to entertain any other
sentiments than those of extreme good will and sincere wishes for his
happiness, &c.

Footnote 6:

  It is right to remark that Colonel Gustafson (Gustavus IV.) has
  declared this statement to be erroneous. But, from his letter itself,
  one would be induced to think that the error proceeds solely from
  misinterpretation of his real words: now every one knows how easy, how
  common such inaccuracies are in regard to circumstances transmitted
  through several intermediate persons. Fearful that the
  misunderstanding might originate with myself, which is possible
  enough, I should not have hesitated a moment to charge myself with the
  error; but every reader must judge that the length of Napoleon’s
  conversation and the development of his ideas on this subject, could
  not leave me in any doubt.

“Some time after the expulsion of Gustavus, while the succession to the
Crown was vacant, the Swedes, desirous of recommending themselves to me
and securing the protection of France, asked me to give them a King. My
attention was, for an instant, turned to the Viceroy; but it would have
been necessary for him to change his religion, which I deemed beneath my
dignity and that of all those who belonged to me. Besides, I did not
think the political result sufficiently important to excuse an action so
contrary to our manners. I attached, however, too much value to the idea
of seeing the throne of Sweden in possession of a Frenchman. It was, in
my situation, a puerile sentiment. The real King, according to my
political system and the true interests of France, would have been the
King of Denmark, because I should then have governed Sweden by the
influence of my simple contact with the Danish provinces. Bernadotte was
elected, and he was indebted for his elevation to his wife, the
sister-in-law of my brother Joseph, who then reigned at Madrid.

“Bernadotte, affecting great dependence on me, came to ask my
approbation, protesting, with too visible an anxiety, that he would not
accept the Crown, unless it was agreeable to me.

“I, the elected Monarch of the people, had to answer that I could not
set myself against the elections of other nations. It was what I told
Bernadotte, whose whole attitude betrayed the anxiety excited by the
expectation of my answer. I added that he had only to take advantage of
the good-will of which he had been the object; that I wished to be
considered as having had no weight in his election, but that it had my
approbation and my best wishes. I felt, however, shall I say it, a
secret instinct, which made the thing disagreeable and painful.
Bernadotte was, in fact, the serpent which I nourished in my bosom; he
had scarcely left us before he attached himself to the system of our
enemies, and we were obliged to watch and dread him. At a later period,
he was one of the great active causes of our calamities; it was he who
gave to our enemies the key of our political system and communicated the
tactics of our armies; it was he who pointed out to them the way to the
sacred soil! In vain would he excuse himself by saying that, in
accepting the Crown of Sweden, he was thenceforth bound to be a Swede
only; pitiful excuse, valid only with those of the populace and the
vulgar that are ambitious! In taking a wife, a man does not renounce his
mother, still less is he bound to transfix her bosom and tear out her
entrails. It is said that he afterwards repented, that is to say, when
it was no longer time, and when the mischief was done. The fact is that,
in finding himself once more among us, he perceived that opinion exacted
justice of him; he felt himself struck with death. Then the film fell
from his eyes; for it is not known to what dreams his presumption and
his vanity might have incited him in his blindness.”

At the end of this and many other things besides, I presumed to observe
to him, as a very fantastical and extraordinary matter of chance, that
Bernadotte, the soldier, elevated to a Crown, for which Protestantism
was a necessary qualification, was actually born a Protestant, and that
his son, destined, on that account, to reign over the Scandinavians,
presented himself in the midst of them precisely with the national name
of _Oscar_. “My dear Las Cases,” replied the Emperor, “it is because
that chance, so often cited, of which the ancients made a deity, which
astonishes us every day and strikes us every instant, does not, after
all, appear so singular, so capricious, so extraordinary, but in
consequence of our ignorance of the secret and altogether natural
causes, by which it is produced; and yet this single combination is
sufficient to create the marvellous and give birth to mysteries. Here,
for instance, with respect to the first point, that of having been born
a Protestant, let not the honour of that circumstance be assigned to
chance; blot that out. With regard to the second, the name of Oscar; I
was his godfather, and, when I gave him the name, I doted upon Ossian;
it presented itself, of course, very naturally. You now see how simple
that is which so greatly astonished you.”

At the end of this conversation, the Emperor returned to Paul; he talked
of the passionate fits brought upon him by the perfidy of the English
ministry. He had been promised Malta, the moment it was taken possession
of, and accordingly, he was in great haste to get himself nominated
Grand Master. Malta reduced, the English ministers denied that they had
promised it to him. It is confidently stated that, on the reading of
this shameful falsehood, Paul felt so indignant that, seizing the
dispatch in full Council, he ran his sword through it, and ordered it to
be sent back in that condition, by way of answer. “If it be a folly,”
said the Emperor, “it must be allowed that it is the folly of a noble
soul; it is the indignation of virtue, which was incapable, until then,
of suspecting such baseness.”

At the same time, the English ministers, treating with us for the
exchange of prisoners, refused to include, on the same scale, the
Russian prisoners taken in Holland, who were in the actual service and
fought for the sole cause of the English. “I had,” said the Emperor,
“hit upon the bent of Paul’s character. I seized time by the forelock; I
collected these Russians; I clothed them and sent them back to him
without any expense. From that instant, his generous heart was
altogether devoted to me; and, as I had no interest in opposition to
Russia, and should never have spoken or acted but with justice, there
was no doubt that I should be able, for the future, to have had the
Cabinet of St. Petersburgh at my disposal. Our enemies were sensible of
the danger, and it has been thought that this good-will of Paul proved
fatal to him. That might have been the case; for there are Cabinets with
whom nothing is sacred.”

It has been already mentioned that the Emperor complained that the
Prince of Ponte-Corvo (Bernadotte) was scarcely in Sweden before he had
occasion to distrust and counteract his schemes. The following letter is
a decisive proof of this assertion, and also contains an important
exposition of the continental system.

                                       “_Tuileries, August 8, 1811._

“Monsieur, the Prince Royal of Sweden, your private correspondence has
reached me; I have appreciated, as a proof of the sentiments of
friendship you entertain for me, and as a testimony of the loyalty of
your character, the communications which you make to me. There is no
political reason which prevents me from answering you.

“You appreciate, without doubt, the motives of my decree of the 21st of
November, 1806. It prescribes no laws to Europe. It merely traces the
steps that are to be followed, to reach the same end; the treaties,
which I have signed, constitute the remainder. The right of blockade,
which England has arrogated to herself, is as injurious to the commerce
of Sweden and as hostile to the honour of her flag, as it is prejudicial
to the commerce of the French Empire and to the dignity of its power. I
will even assert that the domineering pretensions of England are still
more offensive with regard to Sweden; for your commerce is more maritime
than continental; the real strength of the kingdom of Sweden consists as
much in the existence of its navy as in the existence of its army.

“The development of the forces of France is altogether continental. I
have been enabled to create, within my states, an internal trade, which
diffuses subsistence and money, from the extremities to the centre of
the empire, by the impulse given to agricultural and manufacturing
industry, and by the rigorous prohibition of foreign productions. This
state of things is such that it is impossible for me to decide whether
French commerce would gain much by peace with England.

“The maintenance, observance, or adoption of the decree of Berlin is,
therefore, I venture to say, more for the interest of Sweden and of
Europe, than for the particular interest of France.

“Such are the reasons which my ostensible policy may set up against the
ostensible policy of England. The secret reasons that influence England
are the following: She does not desire peace; she has rejected all the
overtures which I have caused to be made to her; her commerce and her
territory are enlarged by war; she is apprehensive of restitutions; she
will not consolidate the new system by a treaty; she does not wish that
France should be powerful. I wish for peace, I wish for it in its
perfect state, because peace alone can give solidity to new interests,
and States created by conquest. I think, that on this point, your Royal
Highness ought not to differ in opinion from me.

“I have a great number of ships; I have no seamen: I cannot carry on the
contest with England for the purpose of compelling her to make peace;
nothing but the continental system can prove successful. In this
respect, I experience no obstacle on the part of Russia and Prussia;
their commerce can only be a gainer by the prohibitive system.

“Your cabinet is composed of enlightened men. There is dignity and
patriotism in the Swedish nation. The influence of your Royal Highness
in the Government is generally approved: you will experience few
impediments in withdrawing your people from a mercantile submission to a
foreign nation. Do not suffer yourself to be caught by the too tempting
baits which England may hold out to you. The future will prove to you
that, whatever may be the revolutions which time must produce, the
Sovereigns of Europe will establish prohibitive laws, which will leave
them masters in their own dominions.

“The third article of the treaty of the 21st of February, 1802, corrects
the incomplete stipulations of the treaty of Fredericsham. It must be
rigorously observed in every point which relates to colonial
commodities. You tell me that you cannot do without these commodities,
and that, from the want of their introduction, the produce of your
customs is diminished. I will give you twenty millions worth of colonial
produce, which I have at Hamburgh; you will give me twenty millions
worth of iron. You will have no specie to export from Sweden. Give up
these productions to merchants; they will pay the import duties; you
will get rid of your iron; this will answer my purpose. I am in want of
iron at Antwerp, and I know not what to do with the English commodities.

“Be faithful to the treaty of the 24th of February: drive the English
smugglers from the roads of Gottenburg; drive them from the coasts,
where they carry on an open trade: I give you my word that I will, on my
part, scrupulously observe the conditions of that treaty. I shall oppose
the attempts of your neighbours to appropriate to themselves your
continental possessions. If you fail in your engagements, I shall
consider myself released from mine.

“It is my wish to be always on an amicable understanding with your Royal
Highness; I shall hear with pleasure your communication of this answer
to his Swedish Majesty, whose good intentions I have constantly
appreciated.

“My Minister for Foreign Affairs will return an official answer to the
last note, which the Comte d’Essen has submitted for my perusal.

                               “This letter having no other end, &c.

                                                            NAPOLEON.”

[Illustration:

  HOUSE IN WHICH NAPOLEON WAS BORN,

  AT AJACCIO, IN CORSICA.

  London: Published for Henry Colburn, Feb. 1836.
]

NAPOLEON’S PATRIMONIAL VINEYARD, &C.—HIS NURSE—HIS PATERNAL HOME.—TEARS
  OF JOSEPHINE DURING WURMSER’S SKIRMISHES IN THE ENVIRONS OF MANTUA.

8th.—I went to the Emperor’s apartment about eleven o’clock. He was
dressing himself, and looking over, with his valet, some samples of
perfumery and scents, received from England. He enquired about them all,

did not know one of them, and laughed heartily at his gross ignorance,
as he called it. He wished to breakfast in the tent, and we all
assembled there.

He complained of the bad quality of the wine; and appealed to his
maître-d’hôtel, Cipriani, who is a Corsican, whether he had not much
better in their country. He said that he had received, as part of his
patrimony, the best vineyard in the island, extensive and productive,
called _l’Esposata_, and he felt it his duty, he said, not to mention it
but with gratitude. It was to that vineyard that he was indebted, in his
youth, for his visits to Paris; it was that which supplied the expenses
of his vacations. We asked him what had become of it. He told us, that
he had long ago given it to his nurse, to whom, he was sure he must have
given at least one hundred and twenty thousand francs in lands and
houses in the island. He had even resolved, he said, to give her his
patrimonial house; but finding it too much above her situation, he had
made a present of it to the Romalino family, his nearest relatives by
his mother’s side, on condition that they should transfer their
habitation to his nurse.[7]

Footnote 7:

  The patrimonial house of Napoleon, his cradle, at present (1824) in
  the possession of M. Romalino, member of the Chamber of Deputies, is,
  as it might naturally be supposed, an object of eager curiosity and
  great veneration to travellers and military men in particular.

  I am assured by eye-witnesses, that, on the arrival of every regiment
  in Corsica, the soldiers instantly run to it in crowds, and obtain
  admission with a certain degree of authority. It might be said that
  they believe themselves entitled to it as a right. Once admitted,
  every one conducts himself according to the warmth of his feeling, one
  raises his hands to heaven, as he looks about him, another falls on
  his knees, a third kisses the floor, and a fourth bursts into tears.
  There are some who seem to be seized by a fit of insanity. Something
  similar is said of the tomb of the great Frederic. Such is the
  influence of heroes.

In short, he had, he said, made a great lady of her. She had come to
Paris at the time of the coronation, and had an audience of the Pope for
upwards of an hour and a half. “Poor Pope,” exclaimed the Emperor, “he
must have had a good deal of spare time! She was, however, extremely
devout. Her husband was a coasting trader of the island. She gave great
pleasure at the Tuileries, and enchanted the family by the vivacity of
her language and her gestures. The empress Josephine made her a present
of some diamonds.”

After breakfast, the Emperor, adhering to his resolution of yesterday,
proceeded with his work. He finished the chapter of Castiglione, and
then went to the wood, with the intention of waiting for the calash. In
continuance of the conversation, which had been brought on by the
chapter, he related that Josephine had left Brescia with him, and had
thus commenced the campaign against Wurmser. Arrived at Verona, she had
witnessed the first shots that were fired. When she returned to
Castel-Nuovo, and saw the wounded as they passed, she was desirous of
reaching Brescia; but she found herself stopped by the enemy, who was
already at Ponte-Marco. In the anxiety and agitation of the moment, she
was seized with fear, and wept a great deal, on quitting her husband,
who exclaimed, when embracing her, and with a kind of inspiration:
“Wurmser shall pay dearly for those tears which he causes thee!” She was
obliged to pass in her carriage very close to the fortifications of
Mantua. She was fired upon from the place, and one of her suite was even
wounded. She traversed the Po, Bologna, Ferrara, and stopped at Lucca,
attended by dread and the unfavourable reports, which were usually
spread around our patriotic armies; but she was internally supported by
her extreme confidence in her husband’s good fortune.

Such was, however, already the opinion of Italy, observed the Emperor,
and the sentiments impressed by the French General, that, in spite of
the crisis of the moment, and of all the false reports which accompanied
him, his wife was received at Lucca by the Senate, and treated with the
same respect as the greatest princess. It came to compliment her, and
presented her with the oils of honour. It had reason to applaud itself
for that conduct. A short time afterwards the couriers brought
intelligence of the prodigious achievements of her husband, and the
annihilation of Wurmser.

The Emperor returned to the saloon for the first time since the fire. It
is gradually furnished with articles sent expressly from London, which
make it a little more tolerable. After dinner, the Emperor began with
reading Turcaret, with which, he said, notwithstanding all its wit, he
felt himself disgusted, in consequence of its vulgarity; but it bore, he
remarked, the impression of Le Sage. He then took up l’Avocat Patelin,
and was much amused with its genuine humour.

9th.—The Emperor breakfasted in the tent, and revised the chapter of the
Brenta. At three o’clock, he took an airing in the calash. The Governor
called during our ride. It was understood that he wished to speak to the
Emperor on the celebration of the Prince Regent’s birthday, which is to
take place next Monday, the 12th inst., and to give him notice of the
salutes and volleys that are to be fired on the occasion at the camp,
situated so closely to us. It is said, on the other hand, that he has
given directions for supplying the Emperor’s table only, and that each
of us is to be put upon a particular allowance, as he finds the expense
very much beyond his credit. At any rate, we shall see.

          CATHERINE II.—IMPERIAL GUARDS.—PAUL I. &C.—PROJECTS
                             ON INDIA, &C.

10th.—The Emperor was indisposed and took a bath. At three he walked out
and called for the carriage. He had just read the history of Catherine.
“She was,” he said, “a commanding woman; she was worthy of having a
beard upon her chin. The catastrophe of Peter and that of Paul were
seraglio revolutions, the work of janissaries. These palace-soldiers are
terrible, and dangerous in proportion as the Sovereign is absolute. My
imperial guard might also have become fatal under any other but myself.”

The Emperor said that he and Paul had been on the best terms together.
At the time of his murder, in which the public spared neither his
relations nor his allies, he had concerted a plan with him, at that very
moment, for an expedition to India, and he would have certainly
prevailed upon him to carry it into execution. Paul wrote to him very
often, and at great length. His first communication was curious and
original. “Citizen First Consul,” (he had written to him with his own
hand,) “I do not discuss the merits of the rights of man; but, when a
nation places at its head a man of distinguished merit and worthy of
esteem, it has a government, and France has, henceforth, one in my
eyes.”

On our return, we found the Admiral and his lady; the Emperor took them
in the calash and made another tour. He afterwards walked for some time
with Lady Malcolm, to whom he behaved in a most gracious manner.

After dinner, the Emperor turned over the leaves of two volumes of the
Théâtre Français, without being able to find any thing capable of fixing
his attention.

                        THE EMPEROR BISHOP, &C.

11th.—After our breakfast in the tent and a few turns in the garden, the
Emperor read, for the last time, the chapter of Arcole.

During our ride in the calash, somebody observed that it was Sunday. “We
should have mass,” said the Emperor, “if we were in a Christian country,
if we had a priest; and that would have been a pastime for us during the
day. I have been always fond of the sound of the bells in the country.
We should,” he added in a gay tone, “resolve upon choosing a priest
among us;—the curate of St. Helena.”—But how ordain him, it was said,
without a bishop?—“And am I not one,” replied the Emperor, “have I not
been anointed with the same oil, consecrated in the same manner? Were
not Clovis and his successors anointed, at the time, with the formula of
_Rex Christique sacerdos_? Were they not, in fact, real bishops? Was not
the subsequent suppression of that formula caused by the jealousy and
policy of the bishops and popes?”

I did not eat at dinner, the Emperor wished to know the cause. I had a
violent pain in my stomach, a complaint to which I said I was very
subject. “I am more fortunate than you,” he observed. “In all my life, I
never had either the head-ache or a pain in my stomach” The Emperor
often repeated what he had said, and he has pronounced these same words
perhaps ten, twenty, or thirty times, in the midst of us at different
moments.[8]

                         CAMPAIGN OF 1809, &C.

12th.—The Emperor passed the morning in his bath, reading the Journals
des Debats of March and April, received yesterday by way of the Cape.
The Emperor was very much occupied with them; they produced a great
degree of agitation in his system.

In general, since the Emperor had received books, and particularly the
Moniteur, he continued much more at home; he scarcely ever went abroad;
he no longer used a horse, nor even the calash; he hardly took the air
for a few moments in the garden; he was not the better for it, his
features and his health underwent a visible alteration.

I found him to-day reading Les Croisades by Michaud, which he left to
run over Les Memoires de Bezenval. He stopped at the duel between the
Comte d’Artois and the Duc de Bourbon. He found the details curious, but
they seemed to be very remote from us. “It is difficult,” he observed,
“to reconcile times so close to us with manners so different.”

In the course of this day’s conversations, the Emperor happened to
repeat, what I have mentioned elsewhere, that his finest manœuvre had
been at Eckmuhl, without, however, specifying it any further.

Footnote 8:

  I commonly pass over all details of this kind as trivial, unless an
  occasion for their utility presents itself, and unfortunately I have
  not time to look for, or to give rise to, such occasions. The trifling
  circumstance, however, which I relate here, acquires but too great a
  value by the nature of the death and the protracted and terrible
  agonies of the immortal victim, who expired under the triple tortures
  of body, mind, and heart. He would have had much less to endure from
  the hands of cannibals!... And these sufferings and these torments
  were coldly reserved for him by a barbarous administration, which, by
  that proceeding, has stained the annals of a people so justly renowned
  for the elevation of their sentiments and their sympathy with
  misfortune!... But a sad and painful celebrity will attach to the
  names of the executioners of Napoleon. The indignation of the generous
  hearts of every age and of every country strikes them for ever with
  eternal reprobation!

ON THE WAR WITH RUSSIA.—FATALITIES, &C.—M. DE TALLEYRAND, &C.—MADAME DE
  STAEL’S CORINNE.—M. NECKER, &C.

13th. At an early hour in the morning, I accompanied the Emperor very
far into the wood; he conversed for upwards of an hour, on the situation
of France, and then reverted to the persons who had betrayed him, and
the numerous fatalities which had hurried him along; to the perfidious
security caused by his marriage with Austria; to the infatuation of the
Turks, who made peace precisely when they ought to have made war; to
that of Bernadotte, who was actuated by his self-love and his
resentment, rather than by his real grandeur and stability; to a season
severe beyond measure, and even to the superiority of talent, evinced by
M. de Narbonne, who, discovering the designs of Austria, compelled her
to take active measures. Finally, he reverted to the successes of Lutzen
and Bautzen, which, by bringing back the king of Saxony to Dresden, put
him, Napoleon, in possession of the hostile signatures of Austria, and
deprived her of all further subterfuge. “What an unhappy concurrence!”
he exclaimed in a most expressive tone, “and yet,” he continued, “the
day after the battle of Dresden, Francis had already sent a person to
treat. It was necessary, that Vandamme’s disaster should happen at a
given moment, to second, as it were, the decree of fate.”

M. de Talleyrand, to whose conduct the Emperor frequently alluded, for
the purpose of discovering, he said, when he had really begun to betray
him, had strongly urged him to make peace, on his return from Leipsic.
“I must,” he observed, “do him that justice. He found fault with my
speech to the Senate, but warmly approved of that which I made to the
Legislative Body. He uniformly maintained, that I deceived myself with
respect to the energy of the nation; that it would not second mine, and
that it was requisite for me to arrange my affairs by every possible
sacrifice. It appears that he was then sincere. I never, from my own
experience, found Talleyrand eloquent or persuasive. He dwelt a great
deal, and a long time, on the same idea. Perhaps also, as our
acquaintance was of old date, he behaved in a peculiar manner to me. He
was, however, so skilful in his evasions and ramblings that, after
conversations which lasted several hours, he has gone away, frequently
avoiding the explanations and objects I expected to obtain from him on
his coming.”

With regard to the affairs of the moment and to the contents of the last
journals which described France in a constantly increasing agitation,
the result was that the chances of the future seemed indefinite,
multiplied, and inexhaustible for all Europe, and that there existed, at
that instant, an incontrovertible fact, communicated to us from all
quarters, that nobody in Europe considered himself in a permanent
situation. Every one seemed to apprehend or to foresee new events.

The Emperor kept me to breakfast with him in the tent. He afterwards
sent for Madame de Staël’s Corinne, and read some chapters of it. He
said that he could not get through it. Madame de Staël had drawn so
complete a likeness of herself in her heroine, that she had succeeded in
convincing him that it was herself. “I see her,” said he, “I hear her, I
feel her, I wish to avoid her, and I throw away the book. I had a better
impression of this work on my memory, than what I feel at present.
Perhaps it is because, at the time, I read it with my thumb, as M.
l’Abbé de Pradt ingeniously says, and not without some truth. I shall,
however, persevere; I am determined to see the end of it; I still think
that it was not destitute of some interest. Yet I cannot forgive Madame
de Staël for having undervalued the French in her romance. The family of
Madame de Staël is unquestionably a very singular one—her father, her
mother and herself, all three on their knees, in constant adoration of
each other, regaling one another with reciprocal incense, for the better
edification and mystification of the public. Madame de Staël may,
nevertheless, exult in surpassing her noble parents, when she presumed
to write, that her sentiments for her father were such that she detected
herself in being jealous of her mother.

“Madame de Staël,” he continued, “was ardent in her passions, vehement
and extravagant in her expressions. This is what was discovered by the
police, while she was under its superintendence. ‘I am far from you;’
(she was probably writing to her husband,) ‘come instantly;—I command;—I
insist upon it; I am on my knees; I beseech you, come.—My hand grasps a
dagger. If you hesitate, I shall kill myself; and you alone will be
guilty of my destruction’” This was Corinne.

She had, said the Emperor, combined all her efforts and all her means to
make an impression on the General of the army of Italy; without any
knowledge of him, she wrote to him, when far off; she tormented him when
present. If she was to be believed, the union of genius with a little
insignificant Creole, incapable of appreciating or comprehending him,
was a monstrosity. Unfortunately the General’s only answer was an
indifference which women never forgive, and which, indeed, he remarked
with a smile, is hardly to be forgiven.

On his arrival at Paris, he was followed with the same eagerness, but he
maintained, on his part, the same reserve, the same silence. Madame de
Staël resolved, however, to extract some words from him and to struggle
with the conqueror of Italy, attacked him face to face, at the grand
entertainment given by M. de Talleyrand, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
to the victorious General. She challenged him in the middle of a
numerous circle, to tell her who was the greatest woman in the world,
whether dead or living. “She, who has had most children,” answered
Napoleon, with great simplicity. Madame de Staël was, at first, a little
disconcerted, and endeavoured to recover herself by observing that it
was reported that he was not very fond of women. “Pardon me, Madam,”
again replied Napoleon, “I am very fond of my wife.”

The General of the army of Italy, said the Emperor, might, no doubt,
have excited the enthusiasm of the Genevese Corinna to its highest
pitch; but he dreaded her politic perfidy and her thirst of celebrity;
he was, perhaps, in the wrong. The heroine had, however, been too eager
in her pursuit and too often discouraged, not to become a violent enemy.
“She instigated the person, who was then a under her influence, and he,”
observed the Emperor, “did not enter upon the business in a very
honourable manner. On the appointment of the Tribunate, he employed the
most pressing solicitations with the First Consul to be nominated a
member. At eleven o’clock at night, he was supplicating with all his
might; but at twelve, when the favour was granted, he was already erect
and almost in an insulting attitude. The first meeting of the Tribunes
was a splendid occasion for his invectives against me. At night, Madame
de Staël’s hotel was illuminated. She crowned her Benjamin amidst a
brilliant assembly, and proclaimed him a second Mirabeau. This farce,
which was ridiculous enough, was followed by more dangerous plans. At
the time of the Concordat, against which Madame de Staël was quite
furious, she united at once against me the aristocrats and the
republicans. ‘You have,’ she exclaimed, ‘but a single moment left;
to-morrow the tyrant will have forty thousand priests at his disposal.’”

“Madame de Staël,” said Napoleon, “having at length tired out my
patience, was sent into exile. Her father had seriously offended me
before, at the time of the campaign of Marengo. I wished to see him on
my way, and he struck me merely as a dull bloated college tutor. Shortly
afterwards, and with the hope, no doubt, of again appearing, by my help,
in public life, he published a pamphlet, in which he proved that France
could neither be a republic nor a monarchy. What it might be,” remarked
the Emperor, “was not sufficiently evident. In that work, he called the
First Consul, _the necessary man_, &c. Lebrun replied to him, in a
letter of four pages, in his admirable style, and with all his powers of
sarcasm; he asked him whether he had not done sufficient mischief to
France, and whether his pretensions to govern her again were not
exhausted by his experiment of the Constituent Assembly.

“Madame de Staël, in her disgrace, carried on hostilities with the one
hand, and supplicated with the other. She was informed, on the part of
the First Consul, that he left her the universe for the theatre of her
achievements; that he resigned the rest of the world to her, and only
reserved Paris for himself, which he forbade her to approach. But Paris
was precisely the object of Madame de Staël’s wishes. No matter; the
Consul was inflexible. Madame de Staël, however, occasionally renewed
her attempts. Under the empire, she wished to be a lady of the palace.
Yes or no might certainly be pronounced; but by what means could Madame
de Staël be kept quiet in a palace?” &c.

After dinner, the Emperor read the Horatii, and was frequently
interrupted by our bursts of admiration. Never did Corneille appear to
us grander, more noble, more nervous, than on our rock.

              SHOOTING PARTY AT ST. HELENA, &c.—EVE OF THE
                          15TH OF AUGUST, &C.

14th. The Emperor went out early. He sent for me before nine o’clock.
His intention was to mount his horse, and endeavour to get a shot at
some partridges, which we saw every time we were in the carriage; but
which never let any one with a fowling-piece come near them. The Emperor
walked on for the purpose of placing himself in a convenient situation,
but the partridges were no longer to be found. He was soon fatigued, and
got on horseback, observing that our shooting party was not exactly
after the fashion of those of Rambouillet and Fontainebleau. We
breakfasted, on our return, in the tent. The Emperor placed little
Tristan, whom he saw crossing the meadow, at table, and was much amused
with him during the whole of the repast.

After breakfast, the Emperor had the chapter of Rivoli read over again
to him, and finished it. We had gone through three-fourths of it, when
the Governor being announced, we made a precipitate retreat from the
tent, and each of us took refuge in his den. The Emperor was less
inclined than any other person to let himself be seen: his conversations
with the Governor are by far too disagreeable and painful to him. “I am
determined,” he said, “to have no more to do with him. Harsh remarks
escape me, which affect my character and my dignity; nothing should fall
from my lips but what is kind and complimentary.” He found himself
fatigued with his exercise in the morning, and took a bath.

About five o’clock, he took a turn in the calash, the weather was
delicious.

The Governor had expressed an earnest desire to see the Emperor; he
wished, he said, to speak with him on business. It is suspected that it
was to tell him that he had no more money, that he had exhausted all,
and that he no longer knew how to act; a matter of perfect indifference
to the Emperor, who would not have failed, once more, to entreat to be
let alone.

The Emperor played at chess, before dinner, in the saloon; he had taken
some punch. It was late when I arrived; he told me, on entering, to take
my share of the punch; but it was observed that there were no more
glasses. “O yes,” said he, handing me his, “and he will drink out of it,
I am sure.” He then added, “This is the English fashion; is it not? In
our country one seldom drinks after any one but one’s mistress.“

It was remarked, during dinner, that it was the eve of the 15th of
August; the Emperor then observed; “Many healths will be drunk
to-morrow, in Europe, to St. Helena. There are certainly some
sentiments, some wishes, that will traverse the ocean.” He had
entertained the same thought in the morning when on horseback, and had
said the same things to me.

After dinner, Cinna;—Corneille appears to us divine.

                        THE EMPEROR’S BIRTH-DAY.

15th.—This day, the 15th of August, was the Emperor’s birthday. We had
determined to wait upon him, in a body, about eleven o’clock. He
disappointed us by appearing gaily at our doors at nine. The weather was
mild; he went to the garden, and we all assembled there in succession.
The Grand Marshal, with his wife and children, joined us. The Emperor,
surrounded by his faithful servants, breakfasted in the large and
beautiful tent, which is a really fortunate acquisition. The temperature
was fine, and he himself cheerful and talkative. He seemed, for some
instants, to participate in our sentiments and wishes. He desired, he
said, to pass the whole day in the midst of us. Accordingly, we
continued together, and spent the time in conversation, in different
pursuits, in walking, and in riding in the carriage.

            POLYTECHNIC SCHOOL SUPPRESSED, &c.—INDECENCY OF
                   THE ENGLISH JOURNALS.—ICE MACHINE.

16th.—My son and I went, at a very early hour, to the tent, where the
Emperor continued employed on different chapters of the Campaign of
Italy until two o’clock, when the Governor being announced, he retired,
muttering, “The wretch, I believe, envies me the air I breathe.”

During breakfast, he had called for the Journal des Débats, which
contained the organization of the academies; he wished to see the names
of the members, who had been expelled from the Institute. This led him
to revert to the suppression of the Polytechnic School, which was said
to be useless and dangerous. The English Journal, which we had received,
was not of that opinion. It maintained that the suppression alone was
more valuable to the enemies of France than a signal victory, and that
nothing could more decidedly prove the real pacific sentiments and the
extreme moderation of the dynasty, which then governed France, &c. It
also stated several other things.

Somebody remarked, upon this subject, that the English papers shewed a
malevolence against the French Government, which extended to coarseness
and indecency.

Lord or Lady Holland had, with a peculiar degree of attention, sent to
Longwood, for the Emperor’s use, a newly invented machine, adapted to
the formation of ice. It was delivered to us to-day, through the
intervention of Admiral Malcolm. The Emperor went out about five
o’clock, and was desirous of witnessing the experiment; the Admiral was
present, but the experiment proved very imperfect.

The Emperor, after some time, took a walk, accompanied by the Admiral,
and the conversation turned upon a variety of subjects; it was
maintained in the most affable and friendly manner on the part of the
Emperor.

RELIGIOUS IDEAS OF NAPOLEON.—BISHOP OF NANTES (DE VOISINS).—THE
  POPE.—LIBERTIES OF THE GALLICAN CHURCH.—ANECDOTES.—CONCORDAT OF
  FONTAINEBLEAU.

17th.—While the Emperor was at breakfast in the tent, two persons
described the excesses which they had witnessed in the army, and which
had not come to his knowledge. They noticed the numerous violations of
his orders, the violent abuses of authority, and other outrages. The
Emperor listened; but some were so shocking that he could not, he said,
give credit to them, and observed: “Come, gentlemen, these are libels.”

The wind was very violent; it blew a storm, with occasional showers. The
wet obliged the Emperor to go in again.

After dinner Zaire and the beautiful scenes of Œdipe were read, among
which he particularly pointed out that of the discovery, which he
pronounced the finest and the most finished of the drama.

In speaking of priests and religion, the conversation led the Emperor to
say: “Man, entering into life, asks himself: Whence do I come? What am
I? Whither am I to go? These are so many mysterious questions, which
urge us on to religion. We eagerly embrace it; we are attracted by our
natural propensity; but as we advance in knowledge our course is
stopped. Instruction and history are the great enemies of religion,
deformed by human imperfection. Why, we ask ourselves, is the religion
of Paris neither that of London nor of Berlin? Why is that of
Petersburgh different from that of Constantinople? Why is the latter
different from that of Persia, of the Ganges, and of China? Why is the
religion of ancient times different from that of our days? Then reason
is sadly staggered; it exclaims, O religions, religions! the children of
man!... We very properly believe in God, because every thing around us
proclaims him, and the most enlightened minds have believed in him; not
only Bossuet, whose profession it was, but also Newton and Leibnitz, who
had nothing to do with it. But we know not what to think of the doctrine
that is taught us, and we find ourselves like the watch which goes,
without knowing the watchmaker that made it. And observe a little the
stupidity of those who educate us; they should keep away from us the
idea of paganism and idolatry; because their absurdity excites the first
exercise of our reason, and prepares us for a resistance to passive
belief; and they bring us up, nevertheless, in the midst of the Greeks
and Romans, with their myriads of divinities. Such, for my own part, has
literally been the progress of my understanding. I felt the necessity of
belief; I did believe, but my belief was shocked and undecided, the
moment I acquired knowledge and began to reason; and that happened to me
at so early an age as thirteen. Perhaps, I shall again believe
implicitly; God grant I may! I shall certainly make no resistance, and I
do not ask a greater blessing; it must, in my mind, be a great and real
happiness.

“In violent agitations, however, and in the casual suggestions of
immorality itself, the absence of that religious faith has never, I
assert, influenced me in any respect, and I never doubted the existence
of God; for, if my reason was inadequate to comprehend it, my mind was
not the less disposed to adopt it. My nerves were in sympathy with that
sentiment.

“When I seized on the helm of affairs, I had already fixed ideas of all
the primary elements by which society is bound together; I had weighed
all the importance of religion; I was convinced, and I determined to
re-establish it. But the resistance I had to overcome in restoring
Catholicism would scarcely be credited. I should have been more
willingly followed had I hoisted the standard of Protestantism. This
reluctance was carried so far that in the Council of State, where I
found great difficulty in getting the Concordat adopted, several yielded
only by forming a plan to extricate themselves from it. ‘Well!’ they
said to one another, ‘let us turn Protestants, and that will not affect
us.’ It is unquestionable that, in the disorder which I succeeded, upon
which I found myself I was at liberty to choose between Catholicism and
Protestantism; and it may also be said, with truth, that the general
disposition, at the moment, was quite in favour of the latter: but,
besides my real adherence to the religion in which I was born, I had the
most important motives to influence my decision. What should I have
gained by proclaiming Protestantism? I should have created two great
parties, very nearly equal, in France, when I wished for the existence
of none at all; I should have revived the fury of religious disputes,
when their total annihilation was called for by the light of the age and
my own feelings. These two parties would, by their mutual distractions,
have destroyed France, and rendered her the slave of Europe, when I had
the ambition to make her the mistress of it. By the help of Catholicism
I attained much more effectually all the grand results that I had in
view. In the interior, at home, the smaller number was swallowed up by
the greater, and I relied upon my treating the former with such an
equality that there would be shortly no motive for marking the
difference. Abroad, the Pope was bound to me by Catholicism; and, with
my influence, and our forces in Italy, I did not despair, sooner or
later, by some means or other, of obtaining for myself the direction of
that Pope, and from that time, what an influence! What a lever of
opinion on the rest of the world!” &c. He concluded with saying;
“Francis I. was really in a state to adopt Protestantism, at its birth,
and to declare himself the head of it in Europe. Charles V., his rival,
was the zealous champion of Rome, because he considered that measure as
an additional means to assist him in his project of enslaving Europe.
Was not that circumstance alone sufficient to point out to Francis the
necessity of taking care of his independence; but he abandoned the
greater to run after the lesser advantage. He persevered in pursuing his
imprudent designs on Italy, and, with the intention of paying court to
the Pope, he burnt Protestants at Paris.

“Had Francis I. embraced Lutheranism, which is favourable to royal
supremacy, he would have preserved France from the dreadful religious
convulsions brought on, at later periods, by the Calvinists, whose
efforts, altogether republican, were on the point of subverting the
throne and dissolving our noble monarchy. Unfortunately, Francis I. was
ignorant of all that; for he could not allege his scruples for an
excuse, he, who entered into an alliance with the Turks, and brought
them into the midst of us. It was precisely because he was incapable of
extending his views so far. The folly of the time! The extent of feudal
intellect! Francis I. was, after all, but a hero for tilts and
tournaments, and a gallant for the drawing-room, one of those pigmy
great men.

“The Bishop of Nantes (De Voisins), said the Emperor, made me a real
Catholic by the efficacy of his arguments, by the excellence of his
morals, and by his enlightened toleration. Marie Louise, whose confessor
he was, consulted him once on the obligation of abstaining from meat on
Fridays.—‘At what table do you dine?’ asked the Bishop.—‘At the
Emperor’s.’ ‘Do you give all the orders there?’—‘No.’ ‘You cannot, then
make any alteration in it; would he do it himself?’—‘I am inclined to
think not.’ ‘Be obedient then, and do not provoke a subject for scandal.
Your first duty is to obey, and make him respected; you will not be in
want of other means to amend your life, and to suffer privations in the
eyes of God.’

“He also behaved in the same way with respect to a public communion,
which some persons put into Marie Louise’s head to celebrate on
Easter-day. She would not, however, consent, without the advice of her
prudent confessor, who dissuaded her from it by similar arguments. What
a difference, said the Emperor, had she been worked upon by a fanatic!
What quarrels, what disagreements might he not have caused between us!
What mischief might he not have done, in the circumstances in which I
was placed!”

The Emperor remarked to us, “that the bishop of Nantes had lived with
Diderot, in the midst of unbelievers, and had uniformly conducted
himself with consistency; he was ready with an answer to every one; and,
above all, he had the good sense to abandon every thing that was not
maintainable, and to strip religion of every thing which he was not
capable of defending.—He was asked, ‘has not an animal, which moves,
combines, and thinks, a soul?’ ‘Why not,’ was his answer. ‘But whither
does it go? For it is not equal to ours.’ ‘What is that to you? It
dwells, perhaps, in limbo.’ He used to retreat within the last
intrenchments, even within the fortress itself, and there he reserved
excellent means for defending himself. He argued better than the Pope,
whom he often confounded. He was the firmest pillar, among our bishops,
of the Gallican liberties. He was my oracle, my luminary; in religious
matters, he possessed my unbounded confidence. For, in my quarrels with
the Pope, it was my first care, whatever intriguers and marplots in
cassocs may say, not to touch upon any dogmatic point: I was so steady
in this conduct, that the instant this good and venerable bishop of
Nantes said to me, ‘Take care, there you are grappling with a dogma,’ I
immediately turned off from the course I was pursuing, to return to it
by other ways, without amusing myself by entering into dissertations
with him, or by seeking even to comprehend his meaning; and, as I had
not let him into my secret, how amazed must he not have been at the
circuits I made! How whimsical, obstinate, capricious, and incoherent,
must I not have appeared to him! It was because I had an object in view,
and he was unacquainted with it.

“The Popes could not forgive us our liberties of the Gallican church.
The four famous propositions of Bossuet, in particular, provoked their
resentment. It was, in their opinion, a real hostile manifesto, and they
accordingly considered us at least as much out of the pale of the church
as the Protestants. They thought us as guilty as they, perhaps more so,
and if they did not overwhelm us with their ostensible thunderbolts, it
was because they dreaded the consequences—our separation. The example of
England was before them. They did not wish to cut off their right arm
with their own hand, but they were constantly on the watch for a
favourable opportunity; they trusted to time for it. They are, no doubt,
ready to believe, that it has now arrived. They will, however, be again
disappointed by the light of the age and the manners of the times.

“Some time before my coronation,” said the Emperor, “the Pope wished to
see me, and made it a point to visit me himself. He had made many
concessions. He had come to Paris for the purpose of crowning me; he
consented not to place the crown on my head himself; he dispensed with
the ceremony of the public communion; he had, therefore, in his opinion,
many compensations to expect in return. He had accordingly at first
dreamt of Romagna and the Legations, and he began to suspect that he
should be obliged to give up all that. He then lowered his pretensions
to a very trifling favour, as he called it, my signature to an ancient
document, a worn-out rag, which he held from Louis XIV. ‘Do me that
favour, said he, in fact, it signifies nothing.’ ‘Cheerfully, most holy
father, and the thing is done, if it be feasible.’” It was, however, a
declaration, in which Louis XIV. at the close of his life, seduced by
Madame de Maintenon, or prevailed upon by his confessors, expressed his
disapprobation of the celebrated articles of 1682, the foundations of
the liberties of the Gallican church. The Emperor shrewdly replied, that
he had not, for his own part, any personal objection, but that it was
requisite for him, as a matter of form, to speak to the bishops about
it; on which the Pope repeatedly observed, that such a communication was
by no means necessary, and that the thing did not deserve to make so
much noise. “‘I shall never,’ he remarked, ‘shew the signature, it shall
be kept as secret as that of Louis XIV.’ ‘But, if it signifies nothing,’
said Napoleon, ‘what use is there for my signature? And if any
signification can be drawn from it, I am bound by a sense of propriety
to consult my doctors.’”

With the view, however, of avoiding the imputation of a constant refusal
of every request, the Emperor wished to seem rather inclined to grant
the favour. “The Bishop of Nantes and the other bishops, who were really
French, came to me in great haste. They were furious, and watched me,”
said the Emperor, “as they would have watched Louis XIV. on his
death-bed, to prevent him from turning Protestant. The Sulpicians were
called in; they were Jesuits _au petit pied_, they strove to find out my
intention, and were ready to do whatever I wished.” The Emperor
concluded with observing;—“The Pope had dispensed with the public
communion in my favour, and it is from his determination in that respect
that I form my opinion of the sincerity of his religious belief. He had
held a congregation of cardinals for the purpose of settling the
ceremonial. The greater number warmly insisted upon my taking the
communion in public, asserting the great influence of the example on the
people, and the necessity of my holding it out. The Pope, on the
contrary, fearful lest I should fulfil that duty as if I were going
through one of the articles of M. de Ségur’s programme, looked upon it
as a sacrilege, and was inflexible in opposing it. ‘Napoleon,’ he
observed, ‘is not perhaps a believer; the time will, no doubt, come, in
which his faith will be established, and in the mean time, let us not
burthen his conscience or our own.’

“In his Christian charity, for he really is a worthy, mild, and
excellent man, he never once despaired of seeing me a penitent, at his
tribunal; he has often let his hopes and thoughts on that subject escape
him. We sometimes conversed about it in a pleasant and friendly manner.
‘It will happen to you, sooner or later,’ said he, with an innocent
tenderness of expression; ‘you will be converted by me or by others, and
you will then feel how great the content, the satisfaction of your own
heart,’ &c. In the mean time, my influence over him was such, that I
drew from him, by the mere power of my conversation, that famous
Concordat of Fontainebleau, in which he renounced the temporal
sovereignty, an act on account of which he has since shown that he
dreaded the judgment of posterity, or rather the reprobation of his
successors. No sooner had he signed than he felt the stings of
repentance. He was to have dined the following day with me in public;
but at night, he was, or pretended to be ill. The truth is that,
immediately after I left him, he again fell into the hands of his
habitual advisers, who drew a terrible picture of the error which he had
committed. Had we been left by ourselves, I might have done what I
pleased with him; I should have governed the religious with the same
facility that I did the political world. He was, in truth, a lamb, a
good man in every respect, a man of real worth, whom I esteem and love
greatly, and who, on his part, is, I am convinced, not altogether
destitute of interest with regard to me. You will not see him make any
severe complaints against me, nor prefer, in particular, any direct and
personal accusation against me, any more than the other sovereigns.
There may, perhaps, be some vague and vulgar declamations against
ambition and bad faith, but nothing positive and direct; because
statesmen are well aware, that when the hour of libels is past, no one
would be allowed to prefer a public accusation without corroborative
proofs, and they have none of these to produce: such will be the
province of history. On the other hand, there will be at most but some
wretched chroniclers, shallow enough to take the ravings of clubs, or
intrigues, for authentic facts, or some writers of memoirs, who,
deceived by the errors of the moment, will be dead before they are
enabled to correct their mistakes.

“When the real particulars of my disputes with the Pope shall be made
public, the world will be surprised at the extent of my patience, for it
is known that I could not put up with a great deal. When he left me,
after my coronation, he felt a secret spite at not having obtained the
compensations which he thought he had deserved. But, however grateful I
might have been in other respects, I could not, after all, make a
traffic of the interests of the empire by way of paying my own
obligations, and, I was, besides, too proud to seem to have purchased
his kindnesses. He had hardly set his foot on the soil of Italy, when
the intriguers and mischief-makers, the enemies of France, took
advantage of the disposition he was in, to govern his conduct, and from
that instant every thing was hostile on his part. He no longer was the
gentle, the peaceable Chiaramonti, that worthy bishop of Imola, who had
at so early a period shown himself worthy of the enlightened state of
the age. His signature was thenceforth affixed to acts only which
characterised the Gregories and Bonifaces more than him. Rome became the
focus of all the plots hatched against us. I strove in vain to bring him
back by the force of reason, but I found it impossible to ascertain his
sentiments. The wrongs became so serious, and the insults offered to us
so flagrant, that I was imperatively called upon to act, in my turn. I,
therefore, seized his fortresses; I took possession of some provinces;
and I finished by occupying Rome itself, at the same time declaring and
strictly observing that I held him sacred in his spiritual capacity,
which was far from being satisfactory to him. A crisis, however,
presented itself; it was believed, that fortune had abandoned me at
Essling, and measures were in immediate readiness for exciting the
population of that great capital to insurrection. The officer, who
commanded there, thought that he could escape the danger only by getting
rid of the Pope, whom he sent off to France. That measure was carried
into effect without my orders, and was even in direct opposition to my
views. I despatched instant orders for stopping the Pope, wherever he
might be met with, and he was kept at Savona, where he was treated with
every possible care and attention; for I wished to make myself feared,
but not to ill-treat him; to bend him to my views, not to degrade him;—I
entertained very different projects! This removal served only to inflame
the spirit of resentment and intrigue. Until then, the quarrel had been
but temporal; the Pope’s advisers, in the hope of re-establishing their
affairs, involved it in all the jumble of spirituality. I then found it
necessary to carry on the contest with him on that head; I had my
council of conscience, my ecclesiastical councils, and I invested my
imperial courts with the power of deciding in cases of appeal from
abuses; for my soldiers could be of no further use in all this: I felt
it necessary to fight the Pope with his own weapons. To his men of
erudition, to his sophists, his civilians, and his scribes, it was
incumbent upon me to oppose mine.

“An English plot was laid to carry him off from Savona; it was of
service to me, I caused him to be removed to Fontainebleau; but that was
to be the period of his sufferings, and the regeneration of his
splendour. All my grand views were accomplished in disguise and mystery.
I had brought things to such a point, as to render the development
infallible, without any exertion, and in a way altogether natural. It
was accordingly consecrated by the Pope in the famous Concordat of
Fontainebleau, in spite even of my disasters at Moscow. What then would
have been the result, had I returned victorious and triumphant? I had
consequently obtained the separation, which was so desirable, of the
spiritual from the temporal, which is so injurious to his Holiness, and
the commixture of which produces disorder in society, in the name and by
the hands of him who ought himself to be the centre of harmony: and from
that time I intended to exalt the Pope beyond measure, to surround him
with grandeur and honours. I should have succeeded in suppressing all
his anxiety for the loss of his temporal power; I should have made an
idol of him; he would have remained near my person. Paris would have
become the capital of the Christian world, and I should have governed
the religious as well as the political world. It was an additional means
of binding tighter all the federative parts of the empire, and of
preserving the tranquillity of every thing placed without it. I should
have had my religious as well as my legislative sessions; my councils
would have constituted the representation of Christendom, and the Popes
would have been only the presidents. I should have called together and
dissolved those assemblies, approved and published their discussions, as
Constantine and Charlemagne had done; and if that supremacy had escaped
the Emperors, it was because they had committed the blunder of letting
the spiritual heads reside at a distance from them; and the latter took
advantage of the weakness of the princes, or of critical events, to
shake off their dependence and to enslave them in their turn.

“But,” resumed the Emperor, “to accomplish that object, I had found it
requisite to manœuvre with a great deal of dexterity; above all, to
conceal my real way of thinking, to give a direction, altogether
different to general opinion, and to feed the public with vulgar trifles
for the purpose of more effectually concealing the importance and depth
of my secret design. I accordingly experienced a kind of satisfaction on
finding myself accused of barbarity towards the Pope, and of tyranny in
religious matters. Foreigners, in particular, promoted my wishes in this
respect, by filling their wretched libels with invectives against my
pitiful ambition, which, according to them, had driven me to devour the
miserable patrimony of Saint Peter. But I was perfectly aware, that
public opinion would again declare itself in my favour at home, and that
no means could exist abroad for disconcerting my plan. What measures
would not have been employed for its prevention, had it been anticipated
at a seasonable period; for how vast its future ascendency over all the
Catholic countries, and how great its influence even upon those that are
not so, by the co-operation of the members of that religion who are
spread throughout these countries!”

The Emperor said, that this deliverance from the Court of Rome, this
legal union, the control of religion in the hands of the sovereign, had
been, for a long time, the constant object of his meditations and his
wishes. England, Russia, the northern crowns, and part of Germany, are,
he said, in possession of it. Venice and Naples had enjoyed it. No
government can be carried on without it; a nation is otherwise, every
instant, affected in its tranquillity, its dignity, its independence.
But the task,” he added, “was very difficult; at every step I was alive
to the danger. I was induced to think, that, once engaged in it, I
should be abandoned by the nation. I more than once sounded and strove
to elicit public opinion, but in vain, and I have been enabled to
convince myself that I never should have had the national co-operation.
And this explains a sally, which I had witnessed.”

The Emperor perceiving, at one of those grand Sunday audiences, which
were very numerously attended, the Archbishop of Tours (de Barral)
addressed him in a very elevated tone; “Well! Monsieur l’Archevêque, how
do our affairs with the Pope go on?—‘Sire, the deputation of your
bishops is about to set out for Savona.’ Very well! endeavour to make
the Pope listen to reason; prevail upon him to conduct himself with
prudence; otherwise, the consequences will be unpleasant. Tell him
plainly, that he is no longer in the times of the Gregories, and that I
am not a Débonnaire. He has the example of Henry the VIIIth., and,
without his wickedness, I possess more strength and power than he had.
Let him know, that whatever part I may take, I have 600,000 Frenchmen in
arms, who, in every contingency will march with me, for me, and as
myself. The peasantry and mechanics look to me alone, and repose
unlimited confidence in me. The prudent and enlightened part of the
intermediate class, those who take care of their interest, and wish for
tranquillity, will follow me; the only class favourable to him will be
the meddling and talkative, who, will forget him at the end of ten days,
to chat upon some fresh subject.”

And as the archbishop, who betrayed his embarrassment by his
countenance, was about to stammer out some words, the Emperor added in a
greatly softened tone: “You are out of all this; I participate in your
doctrines; I honour your piety; I respect your character!”

The Emperor, I now understand him perfectly, had, no doubt, merely
thrown out those observations, in order that we might give effect to
them in other places; but he deceived himself with respect to our
dispositions, or at least to those of the palace. Some, the least
reflecting part, were decided and loud in censuring his conduct on these
occasions; others, with the best intentions, were extremely cautious not
to let a word transpire, lest it should prove injurious to him in the
public opinion; for, such was, in general, our misconception, our
singular manner of understanding and explaining the Emperor’s meaning,
that, although without any bad design, and solely through levity,
incoherency, or for fashion’s sake, instead of making him popular, we
were perhaps the very persons who did him most injury. I very well
remember that, on the morning when that famous concordat of
Fontainebleau unexpectedly appeared in the Moniteur, some persons
confidentially assured each other in the saloons of St. Cloud, that
nothing was less authentic than that document, and that it was a base
fabrication. Others whispered, that it was, no doubt, genuine in the
main points, but that it had been extracted from the Pope by the
Emperor’s anger and violence. To that I should not be surprised, if the
piquant dramatic episode of Napoleon, at Fontainebleau, _dragging the
father of the faithful by his white hair_, was not precisely the
invention of the political proser who wrote it, but caught up from the
mouths of the courtiers and even of the Emperor’s servants themselves;
and this is the way in which history is written!

              WARM CONVERSATION WITH THE GOVERNOR, IN THE
                          ADMIRAL’S PRESENCE.

18th. The weather was most dreadful during the whole of the night and
day. About three o’clock, the Emperor took advantage of its clearing up
a little and went out. He came to my apartment, and we called on General
Gourgaud, who was indisposed. We then visited Madame de Montholon, who
accompanied us to the garden. The Emperor was in excellent spirits,
which enlivened the conversation. He undertook to persuade Madame de
Montholon to make a general confession, particularly insisting upon her
setting out with her first sin. “Come,” said he, “speak out without
apprehension, do not let our neighbour constrain you; consider him
merely as your confessor; we shall forget it all in a quarter of an
hour.”

And I really believe he would have succeeded in persuading her, when the
Governor unfortunately came to interrupt so pleasant a scene; he made
his appearance, and the Emperor to avoid receiving him, hastily took
shelter in the bottom of the wood. We were joined in a few moments by M.
de Montholon, who acquainted the Emperor that the Governor and the
Admiral earnestly requested the honour of speaking with him. He thought
that some communication was to be made on their part, and returned to
the garden, where he received them.

We remained behind, with the Governor’s officers. The conversation soon
became animated on the part of the Emperor, who, as he walked between
the Governor and the Admiral, almost uniformly addressed himself to the
latter, even when he spoke to the former. We continued at too great a
distance to hear any thing distinctly; but I have since learned, that he
again repeated, and with, perhaps, more energy and warmth, all that he
said to him in the preceding conversations.

In consequence of the favourable explanations, which the Admiral, who
acted the part of mediator, laboured to give of the Governor’s
intentions, the Emperor observed: “The faults of M. Lowe proceed from
his habits of life. He has never had the command of any but foreign
deserters, of Piedmontese, Corsicans, and Sicilians, all renegadoes, and
traitors to their country; the dregs and scum of Europe. If he had
commanded Englishmen; if he were one himself, he would shew respect to
those who have a right to be honoured.” At another time, the Emperor
declared, that there was a moral courage, as necessary as courage on the
field of battle; that M. Lowe did not exercise it here with regard to
us, in dreaming only of our escape, instead of employing the only real,
prudent, reasonable, and sensible means for preventing it. The Emperor
also told him that, although his body was in the hands of evil-minded
men, his soul was as lofty and independent as when at the head of
400,000 men, or on the throne, when he disposed of kingdoms.

To the article respecting the reduction of our expenses, and the money
which was required of the Emperor, he answered: “All those details are
very painful to me; they are mean. You might place me on the burning
pile of Montezuma or Guatimozin without extracting from me gold, which I
do not possess. Besides, who asks you for any thing? Who entreats you to
feed me? When you discontinue your supply of provisions, those brave
soldiers, whom you see there,” pointing, with his hand, to the camp of
the 53d, “will take pity on me; I shall place myself at the grenadiers’
table, and they will not, I am confident, drive away the first, the
oldest soldier of Europe.”

The Emperor having reproached the Governor with having kept some books,
which were addressed to him, he answered, that he had done so in
consequence of their having been sent under the address of _Emperor_.
“And who,” replied the Emperor, with emotion, “gave you the right of
disputing that title? In a few years, your Lord Castlereagh, your Lord
Bathurst, and all the others—you, who speak to me—will be buried in the
dust of oblivion, or if your names be remembered, it will be only on
account of the indignity with which you have treated me, while the
Emperor Napoleon shall, doubtless, continue for ever the subject, the
ornament of history, and the star of civilized nations. Your libels are
of no avail against me; you have expended millions on them; what have
they produced? Truth pierces through the clouds, it shines like the sun,
and like it, is imperishable.”

The Emperor admitted that he had, during this conversation, seriously
and repeatedly offended Sir Hudson Lowe; and he also did him the justice
to acknowledge, that Sir Hudson Lowe had not precisely shewn, in a
single instance, any want of respect; he had contented himself with
muttering, between his teeth, sentences which were not audible. He once
said that he had solicited his recal, and the Emperor observed, that
that was the most agreeable word he could possibly have said. He also
said, that we endeavoured to blacken his character in Europe, but that
our conduct, in that respect, was a matter of indifference to him. The
only disrespect, perhaps, said the Emperor, on the part of the Governor,
and which was trifling, compared with the treatment he had received, was
the abrupt way in which he retired, while the Admiral withdrew slowly,
and with numerous salutes. “The Admiral was precisely then,” observed
the Emperor, in a gay tone of voice, “what the Marquis de Gallo was at
the time of my rupture of Passeriano.”—An allusion to one of the
chapters of the Campaign in Italy, which he had dictated to me.

The Emperor remarked that, after all, he had to reproach himself with
that scene. “I must see this officer no more; he makes me fly into a
violent passion; it is beneath my dignity; expressions escape me which
would have been unpardonable at the Tuileries; if they can at all be
excused here, it is because I am in his hands and subject to his power.”

After dinner, the Emperor caused a letter to be read, in answer to the
Governor, who had officially sent the treaty of the 2nd of August, by
which the allied Sovereigns stipulated for the imprisonment of Napoleon.
Sir Hudson Lowe, by the same conveyance, asked to introduce the foreign
Commissioners to Longwood. The Emperor had, in the course of the day,
dictated the letter to M. de Montholon. It was his wish, that every one
of us should make his objections, and state his opinions. It seemed to
us a master-piece of dignity, energy, and sound reasoning.

THE CONVERSATION WITH THE GOVERNOR AGAIN NOTICED, &C.—EFFECT OF THE
  LIBELS AGAINST NAPOLEON.—TREATY OF FONTAINEBLEAU.—THE WORK OF GENERAL
  S——N.

19th.—The weather continued as dreadful as we had ever seen it. It has
been, for several days, like one of our equinoctial storms in Europe.
The Emperor exposed himself to it, to come to my apartment about ten
o’clock; in going out, he struck one of his legs against a nail near the
door; his stocking was torn halfway down the leg; luckily the skin was
only scratched. He was obliged to return to change. “You owe me a pair
of stockings,” he said, while his valet de chambre was putting on
another pair; “a polite man does not expose his visitors to such dangers
in his apartments. You are lodged too much like a seaman; it is true,
that is not your fault. I thought myself careless about these matters,
but you actually surpass me.”—“Sire,” I answered, “my merit is not
great, no choice is left me. I am truly a hog in its mire, I must
confess; but as your Majesty says, it is not altogether my fault.”

We went into the garden, when it had cleared up for a moment. The
Emperor reverted to the conversation which he had yesterday with the
Governor, in the Admiral’s presence, and again reproached himself with
the violence of his expressions. “It would have been more worthy of me,
more consistent and more dignified, to have expressed all these things
with perfect composure; they would, besides, have been more impressive.”
He recollected, in particular, a name which had escaped him as applied
to Sir H. Lowe (_scribe d’etat-major_,) which must have shocked him, and
the more so because it expressed the truth, and that, we know, is always
offensive. “I have myself,” said the Emperor, “experienced that feeling
in the island of Elba. When I ran over the most infamous libels, they
did not affect me even in the slightest manner. When I was told or read,
that I had _strangled_, _poisoned_, _ravished_; that I had massacred my
sick; that my carriage had been driven over my wounded; I laughed out of
commiseration. How often did I not then say to Madame: ‘Make haste,
mother, come and see the _savage_, the _man-tiger, the devourer of the
human race_; come and admire your child!’ But when there was a slight
approach to truth, the effect was no longer the same; I felt the
necessity of defending myself; I accumulated reasons for my
justification, and even then, it never happened, that I was left without
some traces of a secret torment. My dear Las Cases, such is man!”

The Emperor passed from this subject to his protest against the treaty
of the 2nd of August, which had been read to us after dinner. I presumed
to ask him, whether after noticing in a conspicuous manner the
acknowledgment of his title of Emperor by the English, during their
negotiations at Paris and Chatillon, he had not forgotten that, which
they must have made on occasion of the treaty of Fontainebleau, and
which, it struck me, was omitted. “It was,” he quickly replied, “done on
purpose; I have nothing to do with that treaty; I disclaim it; I am far
from boasting of it, I am rather ashamed of it. It was discussed for me.
I was betrayed by N——, who brought it to me. That epoch belongs to my
history, but to my history on a large scale. If I had then determined to
treat in a sensible manner, I should have obtained the kingdom of Italy,
Tuscany, or Corsica,—all that I could have desired. My decision was the
result of a fault inherent in my character, a caprice on my part, a real
constitutional excess. I was seized with a dislike and contempt of every
thing around me; I was affected with the same feeling for fortune, which
I took delight in defying. I cast my eye on a spot of land, where I
might be uncomfortable and take advantage of the mistakes that might be
made. I fixed upon the island of Elba. It was the act of a soul of rock.
I am, no doubt, my dear Las Cases, of a very singular disposition, but
we should not be extraordinary, were we not of a peculiar mould; I am a
piece of rock, launched into space! You will not, perhaps, easily
believe me, but I do not regret my grandeur, you see me slightly
affected by what I have lost.”

“And why, Sire,” I observed, “should I not believe you? What have you to
regret?... The life of man is but an atom in the duration of history,
but with regard to your majesty, the one is already so full, that you
scarcely ought to take any interest but in the other; if your body
suffers here, your memory is enriched a hundred-fold. Had it been your
lot to end your days in the bosom of uninterrupted prosperity, how many
grand and striking circumstances would have passed away unknown! You
yourself, Sire, have assured me of this, and I have remained impressed
with the force of that truth. Not a day, in fact, passes in which those,
who were your enemies, do not repeat with us, who are your faithful
servants, that you are unquestionably greater here than in the
Tuileries. And even on this rock, to which you have been transferred by
violence and perfidy, do you not still command? Your jailors, your
masters, are at your feet; your soul captivates every one that comes
near you; you shew yourself what history represents St. Louis in the
chains of the Saracens, the real master of his conquerors. Your
irresistible ascendancy accompanies you here. We, who are all about you,
Sire, entertain this opinion of you; the Russian commissioner expressed
the same sentiment, we are assured, the other day, and it is felt by
those who guard you. What have you to regret?”

On our return the Emperor, in spite of the storm, ordered his breakfast
in the tent, and kept me with him. The rain did not penetrate; the only
inconvenience was a considerable degree of damp; but the squalls of wind
and rain whirled round us, and vented themselves far before us, towards
the bottom of the valley; the spectacle was not destitute of beauty.

The Emperor retired about two o’clock; he sent for me some time
afterwards to his cabinet. “I have,” said he, laying down the book, just
read General S——n; he is a madman, a hair-brained fellow, he writes
nonsense. He is, however, after all, readable and amusing; he cuts up,
dissects, judges, and pronounces sentence upon men and things. He does
not hesitate to give advice, in several instances, to Wellington, and
asserts, that he ought to have made some campaigns under Kleber, &c.
Kleber was no doubt a great general, but the notice taken of Soult is
not precisely the best part of the book; he is an excellent director, a
good minister at war.

“This S——n,” he continued, “deserted from the camp at Boulogne, carrying
all my secrets to the English; that might have been attended with
serious consequences. S——n was a general officer; his conduct was
dreadful and unpardonable. But observe how a man, in the moment of
revolution, may be a bad character, impudent, and shameless. I found
him, on my return from the island of Elba; he waited for me with
confidence, and wrote a long letter in which he attempted to make me his
dupe. The English, he said, were miserable creatures; he had been a long
time among them; he was acquainted with their means and resources, and
could be very useful to me. He knew that I was too magnanimous, too
great, to remember the wrongs I had suffered from him. I ordered him to
be arrested, and as he had been already tried and condemned, I am at a
loss to know why he was not shot. Either there was not time to carry his
sentence into effect, or he was forgotten. There can be no forbearance,
no indulgence for the general, who has the infamy to prostitute himself
to a foreign power.”

The Grand Marshal came in; the Emperor, after continuing the
conversation for some time, took him away to play at chess. He suffered
much from the badness of the weather.

After dinner, he read Le Tartuffe; but he was so fatigued, that he could
not get through it. He laid down the book, and, after paying a just
tribute of eulogy to Moliere, he concluded in a manner which we little
expected. “The whole of the Tartuffe,” he remarked, “is, unquestionably,
finished with the hand of a master, it is one of the best pieces of an
inimitable writer. It is, however, marked with such a character, that I
am not at all surprised, that its appearance should have been the
subject of interesting negotiations at Versailles, and of a great deal
of hesitation on the part of Louis XIV. If I have a right to be
astonished at any thing, it is at his allowing it to be performed. In my
opinion, it holds out devotion under such odious colours; a certain
scene presents so decisive a situation, so completely indecent, that,
for my own part, I do not hesitate to say, if the comedy had been
written in my time, I would not have allowed it to be represented.”

                        THE BARONESS DE S——, &C.

20th.—About four o’clock, I attended the Emperor, according to his
orders, in the billiard-room. The weather still continued dreadful; it
did not allow him to set his foot out of doors, and he was, he said,
nevertheless, driven from his apartment and the saloon by the smoke. My
looks told him, he said, that I was quite flustered; it was with the
most lively indignation, and he wished to know the cause of it.

“Two or three years ago,” said I, “a clerk in the war office, a very
worthy man, as far as I know, used to come to my house to give my son
lessons in writing and in Latin. He had a daughter, whom he wished to
make a governess, and begged us to recommend her, should an occasion
present itself. Madame Las Cases sent for her; she was charming, and in
every respect highly attractive. From that moment, Madame Las Cases
invited her occasionally to her house, with the view of introducing her
into the world, and obtaining some acquaintances for her who might prove
useful. But, how strange! this young person, our acquaintance, our
obliged friend, is actually at this moment the Baroness de S——, the wife
of one of the Commissioners of the allied powers, who arrived nearly a
month since, in the island.

“Your Majesty may judge of my surprise, and of all my joy at this
singular freak of fortune. I am then about to have, I said to myself,
positive, particular, and even secret information respecting every thing
that interests me. Several days passed without any communication, but
without any anxiety, and even with some satisfaction on my part. For, I
thought, the greater the caution, the more I had to expect. At length,
hurried on by my impatience, I sent three or four days ago my servant to
Madame de S——; I had described her very properly, and, as an inhabitant
of the island, he found no difficulty in gaining admittance. He returned
soon with an answer from Madame de S——, that she did not know the person
who had sent him. I might, under every circumstance, be still induced to
think, that this was an excess of prudence, and that she was unwilling
to place confidence in one unknown to her. But this very day, I received
notice from the governor, not to attempt to form any secret connexion in
the island; that I ought to be aware of the danger to which I exposed
myself; and that the attempt with which he reproached me was not a
matter of doubt; for he was put in possession of it by the very person
to whom I had addressed myself. Your Majesty now knows what has
confounded me. To find that so villainous a charge should come from a
quarter where I had a right to expect some interest in my affairs, and
even gratitude, has irritated me beyond measure; I am no longer the same
person.”

The Emperor laughed in my face: “How little do you know of the human
heart! What! her father was your son’s tutor, or something of that kind;
she enjoyed your wife’s protection when she was in want of it, and she
is become a German baroness! But, my dear Las Cases, you are the person
whom she dreads most here, who lay her most under constraint; she will
allege that she never saw your wife at Paris, and besides, this
mischievous Sir Hudson Lowe may have been delighted with giving an
odious turn to the thing; he is so artful, so malignant.” And he then
began to laugh at me and my anger.

After dinner, the Emperor resumed his reading of the Tartuffe, which he
had not finished yesterday, and there was enough left for to-day. The
Emperor was quite dejected; the bad weather has a visible effect upon
him.

             CORVISART.—ANECDOTES OF THE SALOONS OF PARIS.

21st.—The weather as horrible as ever.—We are seriously incommoded with
the wet in our apartments; the rain penetrates every where.

The governor’s secretary brought me a letter from Europe; it afforded a
few moments of real happiness; it contained the recollections and good
wishes of my dearest friends. I went and read it to the Emperor.

The Emperor suffered seriously from the badness of the weather. He went
to his saloon about four o’clock; he thought that he was feverish, and
found himself much depressed; he called for some punch, and played a few
games at chess with the grand marshal. The doctor is come from the town.
The two vessels just arrived are from the Cape; one of them is the
Podargus, which left Europe ten days after the Griffin; the other, a
small frigate, on her way from India to Europe. There was, it was said,
a letter for the _Emperor Napoleon_, but it was not delivered, and we
did not know from whom it came.

After dinner it was said that the medicines in the island were
exhausted, and it was remarked, that the Emperor could not be accused of
having contributed to it. This led him to observe, that he did not
recollect having ever taken any medicine. At the Tuileries, he had had
three blisters at once, and even then he had not taken any. He received
a serious wound at Toulon; it was, he said, like that of Ulysses, by
which his old nurse knew him again; he had recovered altogether, without
taking physic. One of us taking the liberty to say; “If your majesty had
the dysentery to-morrow, would you still reject all kind of medicine?”
The Emperor answered; “Now that I am tolerably well, I answer, yes,
without hesitation; but if I were to be very ill, I should, perhaps,
alter my mind, and should then feel that kind of conversion, which is
produced on a dying man through the fear of the devil.” He again
mentioned his incredulity in physic, but he did not think so, he said,
of surgery. He had three times commenced a course of anatomy, but they
had always been broken off by business and disgust. “On a certain
occasion, and at the end of a long discussion, Corvisart, desirous of
speaking to me, with his proofs in hand, was so abominably filthy as to
bring a stomach, wrapped up in his pocket-handkerchief, to St. Cloud,
and I was instantly compelled, at that horrible sight, to cast up all
that I had in mine.”

The Emperor attempted, after dinner, to read a comedy, but he was so
fatigued, and suffered so much, that he was forced to stop and retire
about nine o’clock. He made me follow him, and as he felt no inclination
to sleep, he said; “Come, my dear Las Cases, let us see; let us have a
story about your fauxbourg Saint Germain, and let us endeavour to laugh
at it, as if we were listening to the Thousand and One Nights’!”—“Very
well, Sire; there was, formerly, one of your Majesty’s chamberlains, who
had a grand-uncle, who was very old, very old indeed, ... and I remember
your Majesty telling us the story of a heavy German officer, who, taken
prisoner at the opening of the campaign in Italy, complained that a
young conceited fellow had been sent to command against them, who
spoiled the profession, and made it intolerable. Well! we had precisely
his likeness among us; it was the old grand-uncle, who was still dressed
nearly in the costume of Louis XIV. He showed off, whenever you sent
accounts of any extraordinary achievements on the other side of the
Rhine; your bulletins of Ulm and Jena operated upon him like so many
revulsions of bile. He was far from admiring you. You also spoiled the
profession, in his opinion. He had, he frequently said, made the
campaigns under Marshal de Saxe, which indeed were prodigies in war, and
had not been sufficiently appreciated. ‘War was, no doubt, then an art;
but now!!!’ he remarked, shrugging up his shoulders.... ‘In our time we
carried on war with great decorum; we had our mules; we were followed by
our canteens; we had our tents; we lived well; we had even plays
performed at head-quarters; the armies approached each other; admirable
positions were occupied; a battle took place; a siege was occasionally
carried on, and afterwards we went into winter-quarters, to renew our
operations in the spring. That is,’ he exclaimed, with exultation, ‘what
may be called making war! But now, a whole army disappears before
another in a single battle, and a monarchy is overturned; a hundred
leagues are run over in ten days; as for sleeping and eating, they are
out of the question. Truly, if you call that genius, I am, for my own
part, obliged to acknowledge, that I know nothing about it; and,
accordingly, you excite my pity, when I hear you call him a great man.’”

The Emperor burst into fits of laughter, particularly when the mules and
canteens were mentioned. He then added; “You were of course accustomed
to say a great many foolish things about me.”—“O yes, Sire, and in vast
abundance.” “Very well! We are alone; nobody will intrude; tell me some
more of them.” “A fine gentleman, who had formerly been a captain of
cavalry, and who seemed perfectly satisfied with his own person and
accomplishments, was introduced to a select society where I was present.
‘I come,’ he said, ‘from the Plain of Sablons. I have just seen _our
Ostrogoth_ manœuvre.’ That, Sire, was your Majesty. ‘He had two or
three regiments, which he threw into confusion upon each other, and they
were all lost in some bushes. I would have taken him and all his men
prisoners with fifty maitres (formerly troopers) only. An usurped
reputation!’ he exclaimed. ‘Accordingly, Moreau was always of opinion,
that he would fail in Germany. A war with Germany is talked of; if it
takes place, we shall see how he will get out of it. He will have
justice done to him.’

“The war took place, and your Majesty sent us, in a very few days, the
bulletin of Ulm, and that of Austerlitz; our fine gentleman again made
his appearance in the same company, and for the moment, in spite of our
malevolence, we could not help crying out all at once: ‘And your fifty
maitres!’ ‘Oh! truly,’ said he, ‘it is impossible to comprehend the
thing; this man triumphs over every obstacle: Fortune leads him by the
hand, and, besides, the Austrians are so awkward; such fools!’”...

The Emperor laughed heartily, and wished for some anecdote still more
absurd. “That would indeed, Sire, be very difficult to find. I
recollect, however, an old dowager, who, to the day of her death,
obstinately refused to give credit to any of your successes in Germany.
When Ulm, Austerlitz, and your entrance into Vienna were mentioned in
her presence:—‘So, you believe all that,‘ said she, shrugging up her
shoulders. ‘It is all his fabrication. He would not presume to set a
foot in Germany; be assured, that he is still behind the Rhine, where he
is perishing from fear, and sends us those silly stories: you will
learn, in time, that I am not to be imposed upon.’”

And these stories being over, the Emperor sent me away, saying: “What
are they doing, what must they say, at present? I am certainly now
giving them a fine opportunity.”

22nd.—This was a day of real mourning for me: it was the first, since
our departure from France, in which I did not see the Emperor. I was the
only one, in consequence of fortunate circumstances, who, until now, had
enjoyed that happiness. His sufferings were great, and his seclusion
complete. He did not ask to see a single person.

             THE EMPEROR CONTINUES ILL.—REMARKABLE OFFICIAL
                DOCUMENT, ADDRESSED TO SIR HUDSON LOWE.

23d.—The weather has continued wet and rainy. About half-past three, the
Emperor sent for me to his chamber. He was dressing himself; he had been
very seriously indisposed, but, thanks to his mode of treating himself,
he said, and to his hermetical seclusion of the preceding day, his
complaint was over. He was again well.

I dared to express my sincere grief; I had inscribed, I said, an unhappy
day in my journal; I should have marked it in red ink. And when he
learned what it was: “What indeed,” he said, “is it the only day, since
we left France, in which you have not seen me?... And you are the only
one!...” And after a silence of some seconds, he added, in a tone
peculiarly adapted to make me amends, if that were possible; “But, my
dear Las Cases, if you set such a value on it, if you consider it of so
much moment, why did you not come and knock at my door? I am not
inaccessible to you.”

The Doctor was introduced; he assured us that the Governor had promised
never again to set foot at Longwood. It was ironically observed by one
of us that he began to make himself agreeable.

The Emperor then went to his library, where a long letter which I had
written to Rome,[9] was read to him by my son. He was driven out by the
wet, and, on his way to the saloon and billiard-room, he was tempted by
the sight of the steps to walk a little. “I know,” he said, “I am doing
what is not prudent.” Luckily, the wet weather forced him to return
almost instantly. He took a seat in the saloon, where there was a good
fire, called for infusion of orange-leaves, and played some games of
chess.

Footnote 9:

  It was my letter to Prince Lucien, since so celebrated in the history
  of my persecutions, and which will be found in its proper place.

After dinner, the Emperor read Marmontel’s Tales, and stopped at that of
the self-styled philosopher. He still coughed a great deal, and again
called for some of the same drink. He entered into a long and most
interesting review of Jean Jacques, of his talents, his influence, his
eccentricities, his private vices. He retired at ten o’clock. I regret
very much, that I cannot now recollect the particulars relative to all
these subjects.

In the course of the day M. de Montholon addressed the following
official answer to the Governor, who had sent a letter, respecting the
commissioners of the allied powers, and the embarrassed state of his
finances. It is the letter, which I have already noticed on the 18th of
this month.

                           OFFICIAL DOCUMENT.

“General,—I have received the treaty of the 2d of August, 1815,
concluded between his Britannic Majesty, the Emperor of Austria, the
Emperor of Russia, and the King of Prussia, which was annexed to your
letter of the 23d of July.

“The Emperor Napoleon protests against the purport of that treaty; he is
not the prisoner of England. After having placed his abdication in the
hands of the representatives of the nation, for the benefit of the
constitution adopted by the French people, and in favour of his son, he
proceeded voluntarily and freely to England, for the purpose of residing
there, as a private person, in retirement, under the protection of the
British laws. The violation of all laws cannot constitute a right in
fact. The person of the Emperor Napoleon is in the power of England; but
neither, as a matter of fact, nor of right, has it been, nor is it, at
present, in the power of Austria, Russia, and Prussia; even according to
the laws and customs of England, which has never included, in its
exchange of prisoners, Russians, Austrians, Prussians, Spaniards, or
Portuguese, although united to these powers by treaties of alliance, and
making war conjointly with them. The Convention of the 2d of August,
made fifteen days after the Emperor Napoleon had arrived in England,
cannot, as a matter of right have any effect; it merely presents the
spectacle of the coalition of the four principal powers of Europe, for
the oppression of a single man; a coalition which the opinion of all
nations disavows, as do all the principles of sound morality. The
Emperors of Austria and Russia, and the King of Prussia, not possessing,
either in fact or by right any power over the person of the Emperor
Napoleon, were incapable of enacting any thing with regard to him. If
the Emperor Napoleon had been in the power of the Emperor of Austria,
that prince would have remembered the relations formed by religion and
nature between a father and a son, relations which are never violated
with impunity. He would have remembered that four times Napoleon
re-established him on his throne; at Leoben, in 1797, and at Luneville
in 1801, when his armies were under the walls of Vienna; at Presburgh in
1806, and at Vienna in 1809, when his armies were in possession of the
capital and of three-fourths of the monarchy. That prince would have
remembered the protestations which he made to him at the bivouac in
Moravia in 1806, and at the interview at Dresden in 1812. If the person
of the Emperor Napoleon had been in the power of the Emperor Alexander,
he would have remembered the ties of friendship, contracted at Tilsit,
at Erfurth, and during twelve years of daily intercourse; he would have
remembered the conduct of the Emperor Napoleon the day after the battle
of Austerlitz, when, having it in his power to take him prisoner with
the remains of his army, he contented himself with his word, and
suffered him to effect his retreat; he would have remembered the dangers
to which the Emperor Napoleon personally exposed himself to extinguish
the fire of Moscow and preserve that capital for him: unquestionably
that prince would not have violated the duties of friendship and
gratitude towards a friend in distress. If the person of the Emperor
Napoleon had been even in power of the King of Prussia, that sovereign
would not have forgotten that it was optional with the Emperor, after
the battle of Friedland, to place another prince on the throne of
Berlin; he would not have forgotten, in the presence of a disarmed
enemy, the protestations of attachment and the sentiments which he
expressed to him in 1812, at the interviews at Dresden. It is,
accordingly, evident from the 2d and 5th articles of the said treaty,
that, being incapable of any influence whatever over the fate, and the
person of the Emperor Napoleon, who is not in their power, these princes
refer themselves in that respect to the future conduct of his Britannic
Majesty, who undertakes to fulfil all obligations.

“These princes have reproached the Emperor Napoleon with preferring the
protection of the English laws to theirs. The false ideas which the
Emperor Napoleon entertained of the liberality of the English laws, and
of the influence of a great, generous, and free people on its
government, decided him in preferring the protection of these laws to
that of his father-in-law, or of his old friend. The Emperor Napoleon
always would have been able to obtain the security of what related
personally to himself, whether by placing himself again at the head of
the army of the Loire, or by putting himself at the head of the army of
the Gironde, commanded by General Clausel; but, looking for the future
only to retirement and to the protection of the laws of a free nation,
either English or American, all stipulations appeared useless to him. He
thought that the English people would have been more bound by his frank
conduct, which was noble and full of confidence, than it could have been
by the most solemn treaties. He has been mistaken, but this error will
for ever excite the indignation of real Britons, and, with the present
as well as future generations, it will be a proof of the perfidy of the
English administration. Austrian and Russian commissioners are arrived
at St. Helena; if the object of their mission be to fulfil part of the
duties, which the Emperors of Austria and Russia have contracted by the
treaty of the 2d of August, and to take care, that the English agents,
in a small colony, in the midst of the Ocean, do not fail in the
attentions due to a prince connected with them by the ties of affinity,
and by so many relations, the characteristics of these two sovereigns
will be recognized in that measure. But you, Sir, have asserted, that
these commissioners possessed neither the right nor the power of giving
any opinion on whatever may be transacted on this rock.

“The English ministry have caused the Emperor Napoleon to be transported
to Saint Helena, two thousand leagues from Europe. This rock, situated
under the tropic at the distance of five hundred leagues from any
continent is, in that latitude, exposed to a devouring heat; it is,
during three-fourths of the year, covered with clouds and mists; it is
at once the driest and wettest country in the world. This is the most
inimical climate to the Emperor’s health. It is hatred which dictated
the selection of this residence, as well as the instructions, given by
the English ministry to the officers who command in this country; they
have been ordered to call the Emperor Napoleon, General, being desirous
of compelling him to acknowledge that he never reigned in France, which
decided him not to take an incognito title, as he had determined on
quitting France. First magistrate for life, under the title of first
consul, he concluded the preliminaries of London and the treaty of
Amiens with the king of Great Britain. He received as ambassadors, Lord
Cornwallis, Mr. Merry, and Lord Whitworth, who resided in that quality
at his court. He sent to the King of England, Count Otto and General
Andreossi, who resided as ambassadors at the Court of Windsor. When,
after the exchange of letters between the ministers for foreign affairs
belonging to the two monarchies, Lord Lauderdale came to Paris, provided
with full powers from the King of England, he treated with the
plenipotentiaries provided with full powers from the Emperor Napoleon,
and resided several months at the court of the Tuileries. When,
afterwards, at Chatillon, Lord Castlereagh signed the ultimatum, which
the allied powers presented to the plenipotentiaries of the Emperor
Napoleon, he thereby recognized the fourth dynasty. That ultimatum was
more advantageous than the treaty of Paris; but France was required to
renounce Belgium and the left bank of the Rhine, which was contrary to
the propositions of Frankfort and to the proclamations of the allied
powers; and was also contrary to the oath by which, at his consecration,
the Emperor had sworn the integrity of the empire. The Emperor then
thought these national limits were necessary to the security of France
as well as to the equilibrium of Europe; he thought that the French
nation, in the circumstances under which it found itself, ought rather
to risk every chance of war than to give them up. France would have
obtained that integrity, and with it preserved her honour, had not
treason contributed to the success of the allies. The treaty of the 2d
of August, and the bill of the British parliament, style the Emperor,
Napoleon Bonaparte, and give him only the title of General. The title of
_General Bonaparte_ is, no doubt, eminently glorious; the Emperor bore
it at Lodi, at Castiglione, at Rivoli, at Arcole, at Leoben, at the
Pyramids, at Aboukir: but for seventeen years he has borne that of First
Consul and of Emperor; it would be an admission that he has been neither
first magistrate of the republic, nor sovereign of the fourth dynasty.
Those, who think that nations are flocks, which, by divine right, belong
to some families, are neither of the present age, nor of the spirit of
the English legislature, which has several times changed the succession
of its dynasties, because the great alterations occasioned by opinions,
in which the reigning princes did not participate, had made them enemies
to the happiness of the great majority of that nation. For kings are but
hereditary magistrates, who exist but for the happiness of nations, and
not nations for the satisfaction of kings. It is the same spirit of
hatred, which directed that the Emperor Napoleon should not write or
receive any letter, without its being opened and read by the English
ministers and the officers of St. Helena. He has, by that regulation,
been interdicted the possibility of receiving intelligence from his
mother, his wife, his son, his brothers; and when, wishing to avoid the
inconvenience of having his letters read by inferior officers, he wished
to send sealed letters to the Prince Regent, he was told, that open
letters only could be taken charge of and conveyed, and that such were
the instructions of the ministry. That measure stands in need of no
comment; it will suggest strange ideas of the spirit of the
administration by which it was dictated; it would be disclaimed even at
Algiers! Letters have been received for general officers in the
Emperor’s suite; they were opened and delivered to you; you have
retained them, because they had not been transmitted through the medium
of the English ministry; it was found necessary to make them travel four
thousand leagues over again, and these officers had the misfortune to
know, that there existed on this rock news from their wives, their
mothers, and their children, and that they could not be put in
possession of it, in less than six months!!!—The heart revolts.

“Permission could not be obtained to subscribe to the Morning Chronicle,
to the Morning Post, or to some French journals: some broken numbers of
the Times have been occasionally sent to Longwood. In consequence of the
demand made on board the Northumberland, some books have been sent, but
all those which relate to the transactions of late years have been
carefully kept back. It was since intended to open a correspondence with
a London bookseller for the purpose of being directly supplied with
books which might be wanted, and with those relative to the events of
the day; that intention was frustrated. An English author, having
published at London an account of his travels in France, took the
trouble to send it as a present to the Emperor, but you did not think
yourself authorized to deliver it to him, because it had not reached you
through the channel of your government. It is also said, that other
books, sent by their authors, have not been delivered, because the
address of some was—To the Emperor Napoleon, and of others—To Napoleon
the Great. The English ministry are not authorized to order any of these
vexations. The law, however unjust, considers the Emperor Napoleon as a
prisoner of war; but prisoners of war have never been prohibited from
subscribing to the journals, or receiving books that are printed; such a
prohibition is exercised only in the dungeons of the Inquisition.

“The island of St. Helena is ten leagues in circumference; it is every
where inaccessible; the coast is guarded by brigs; posts within sight of
each other are placed on the shore; and all communication with the sea
is rendered impracticable. There is but one small town, James Town,
where the vessels anchor, and from which they sail. In order to prevent
the escape of an individual, it is sufficient to guard the coast by land
and sea. By interdicting the interior of the island, one object only can
be in view, that of preventing a ride of eight or ten miles, which it
would be possible to take on horseback, and the privation of which,
according to the consultations of medical men, is abridging the
Emperor’s days.

“The Emperor has been placed at Longwood, which is exposed to every
wind; a barren spot, uninhabited, without water, and incapable of any
kind of cultivation. The space contains about 1200 uncultivated fathoms.
At the distance of 11 or 1200 fathoms, a camp has been formed on a small
eminence; another has been since placed nearly at the same distance in
an opposite direction, so that, in the intense heat of the tropic,
whichever way the eye turns nothing is seen but camps. Admiral Malcolm,
perceiving the utility of which a tent would be to the Emperor in that
situation, has had one pitched by his seamen at the distance of twenty
paces from the house; it is the only spot in which shade is to be found.
The Emperor, has, however, every reason to be satisfied with the spirit
which animates the officers and soldiers of the gallant 53d, as he had
been with the crew of the Northumberland. Longwood House was built for a
barn to the company’s farm; some apartments were afterwards made in it
by the Deputy-Governor of the island; he used it for a country-house;
but it was, in no respect, adapted for a residence. During the year that
it has been inhabited, people have always been at work in it, and the
Emperor has been constantly exposed to the inconvenience and
unwholesomeness of a house, in which workmen are employed. His
bedchamber is too small to contain a bedstead of ordinary size; but
every kind of building at Longwood would prolong the inconvenience
arising from the workmen. There are, however, in this wretched island,
some beautiful situations, with fine trees, gardens, and tolerably good
houses, among others Plantation House; but you are prevented by the
positive instructions of the ministry from granting this house, which
would have saved a great deal of expense laid out in building, at
Longwood, huts covered with pitched paper, which are no longer of any
use. You have prohibited every kind of intercourse between us and the
inhabitants of the island; you have, in fact, converted Longwood House
into a secret prison; you have even thrown difficulties in the way of
our communication with the officers of the garrison. The most anxious
care would seem to be taken to deprive us of the few resources afforded
by this miserable country, and we are no better off here than we should
be on Ascension Rock. During the four months you have been at St.
Helena, you have, Sir, rendered the Emperor’s condition worse. It was
observed to you by Count Bertrand, that you violated the law of your
legislature, that you trampled upon the privileges of general officers,
prisoners of war. You answered, that you knew nothing but the letter of
your instructions, and that they were still worse than your conduct
appeared to us.

                                      I have the honour, &c.

                                    (Signed)     COUNT DE MONTHOLON.

“P.S.—I had, Sir, signed this letter, when I received yours of the 17th,
to which you annex the estimate of an annual sum of 20,000_l._ sterling,
which you consider indispensable to meet the expenses of the
establishment of Longwood, after having made all the reductions which
you have thought possible. The consideration of this estimate can, in no
respect, concern us; the Emperor’s table is scarcely supplied with what
is necessary; all the provisions are of bad quality and four times as
dear as at Paris. You require a fund of twelve thousand pounds sterling
from the Emperor, as your government allows you only eight thousand
pounds for all these expenses. I have had the honour of telling you,
that the Emperor had no funds; that no letter had been received or
written for a year; and that he was altogether unacquainted with what is
passing or what may have passed in Europe. Transported by violence to
this rock, at the distance of two thousand leagues, without being able
to receive or to write any letter, he now finds himself at the
discretion of the English agents. The Emperor has uniformly desired and
still desires to provide himself for all his expenses of every kind, and
he will do so, as speedily as you shall give possibility to the means,
by taking off the prohibition, laid upon the merchants of the island, of
carrying on his correspondence, and releasing it from all kind of
inquisition on your part or on that of any of your agents. The moment
the Emperor’s wants shall be known in Europe, the persons who interest
themselves for him will transmit the necessary funds for his supplies.

“The letter of Lord Bathurst, which you have communicated to me, gives
rise to strange ideas! Can your ministers then be so ignorant as not to
know that the spectacle of a great man struggling with adversity is the
most sublime of spectacles? Can they be ignorant, that Napoleon at St.
Helena, amidst persecutions of every kind, against which his serenity is
his only shield, is greater, more sacred, more venerable than on the
first throne of the world, where he was, so long, the arbiter of Kings?
Those, who fail in respect to Napoleon, thus situated, merely degrade
their own character and the nation which they represent!”

MY ENGLISH FAMILY.—JUST DEBT OF GRATITUDE TO THE ENGLISH ON THE PART OF
  THE EMIGRANTS, &C.—GENERAL JOUBERT.—PETERSBURG.—MOSCOW; THE
  CONFLAGRATION.—PROJECTS OF NAPOLEON, HAD HE RETURNED VICTORIOUS.

24th.—I went, at two o’clock, to the Emperor, in his apartment. He had
sent for my Atlas in the morning. I found him finishing his examination
of the map of Russia and of that part of America adjoining the Russian
establishments.

He had suffered, and coughed a great deal, during the night. The weather
had, however, become milder. While he was dressing to go out, he often
dwelt upon the happy idea of the Atlas, the merit of its execution, and
the immensity of its contents. He concluded, as usual, with saying;
“What a collection! what details! How complete in all its parts!”

The Emperor went to the garden. I told him, that I had written, in the
morning, to England, and answered the letter which I had read to him two
or three days ago. “Your English family,” he then observed, “seem to be
very good kind of people; they are very fond of you, and you appear very
much attached to them.” I answered; “Sire, I took care of them in
France, during their ten years captivity, and they had taken care of me
in England, during my ten years emigration. It is altogether the
hospitality of the ancients which we exercise towards each other. I rely
upon them, in every respect, and they are at liberty to dispose of all I
possess.”—“This,” said he, “is a very happy connexion. How did you
obtain it? To what are you indebted for it?” I then told him how I
became acquainted with this family.

“Never was the plank, by the assistance of which an unfortunate person,
after shipwreck, preserved his life, dearer to him than this family is
to me. There are, Sire, no favours, no treasures, which can compensate
the kindnesses I have received from it, and the happiness it has
conferred upon me.

“When the horrible excesses of our revolution compelled us to take
refuge in England, our emigration produced the liveliest sensation in
that country; the arrival of so many illustrious exiles, their past
fortunes, and their then forlorn condition, were impressed on every
mind, and filled every heart. They became the subject of consideration
in political assemblies, in places of divine worship, in fashionable
circles, and in private families. That catastrophe agitated every class,
and excited every sympathy. We were surrounded by a generous and feeling
multitude. We were the objects of the most delicate attentions, and of
the most substantial favours. Such, it must be acknowledged, was the
affecting sight held out by a vast portion of English society, even in
spite of the difference of opinions. It is a testimony due from our
gratitude to the truth of history.

“I was then in London, with a cousin of my name, whose situation at the
court of Versailles had enabled her to be of some service to the most
distinguished persons in Europe, where she was a lady of honour to the
Princess Lamballe, who was herself sub-intendant of the Queen’s
household. That turned out a fortunate circumstance for our family. My
cousin experienced proofs of the greatest benevolence; a great number of
persons were eager to make a tender of their services, and, among
others, a certain young couple. The wife was charming, and distinguished
for the elegance and dignity of her manners; the husband was of an easy
temper, of a mild and honourable character. Their house was almost
instantly open to my cousin and to all her relations, who had every
reason to find themselves as much at their ease there, as if they had
been in their own families.

“This worthy couple took every occasion to oblige and to be of use to
our refugees. Their house was frequented by the most distinguished
emigrants. A great number of us there contracted a debt of gratitude
which, notwithstanding all its extent, I should not despair of paying,
were I alone left to discharge it. I shall leave it as a legacy to my
children, who, if they resemble me, will look upon it as sacred, and
deem themselves happy in redeeming the obligation.

“Elevation of soul, and the emotions of a French heart, characterized
the conduct of Lady .... When the Prince of Condé (arrived in London,)
was looking for a country residence, she sent me to offer him the superb
mansion which she possessed, in the county of Durham. The Prince, after
hearing the particulars, having remarked that it would, no doubt, cost
him a King’s ransom, was agreeably surprised at learning that it was
presented to him by a French woman, who would, she said, consider that
she had received an inestimable price, should a Condé condescend to
inhabit it. He went, instantly, to express his acknowledgments in
person.

“This family visited Paris after the peace of Amiens, and it was in its
bosom, and through its protection, that I was enabled, a few days
sooner, to breathe the air of my country. I was exempted, through its
means, from the tedious and painful formalities required from me by the
act of amnesty on the frontier, and I felt it my duty to provide for
their accommodation at Paris, with much more facility and less
inconvenience than they could have done themselves. I had also the
happiness, when the measure for detaining the English residents was
carried into effect, and this family was placed among the number, of
alleviating their condition in my turn, and becoming their security.

“We were, at length, separated by time and circumstances; but they have
lost nothing in my recollection; and the needle is less constant to the
pole, and less faithful in its guidance, than are my thoughts and my
gratitude, with respect to those good and valuable friends. Such, Sire,
is what your Majesty is pleased to call my English family.”

We had, however, during my relation, walked to the stable, and called
for the calash. The Emperor ordered it to take us up at the bottom of
the wood. We waited for it a long time, because Madame de Montholon was
seized with a sudden indisposition. Her husband came to apologize for
the delay, and the Emperor made him get in.

The conversation turned, during our ride, upon General Joubert, whose
brother-in-law and aid-de-camp M. de Montholon had been.

“Joubert,” said the Emperor, “entertained a high veneration for me; he
deplored my absence at every reverse experienced by the Republic, during
the expedition to Egypt. He was, at that time, at the head of the army
of Italy; he had taken me for his model, aspired to imitate my plans,
and attempted to accomplish nothing less than what I afterwards effected
in Brumaire: he had, however, the Jacobins to assist him. The measures
and intrigues of that party, to place the means of executing that grand
enterprise in his power, had raised him to the command in Italy, after
the disasters of Scherer; of that Scherer who was an ignorant peculator,
and deserving of every censure. But Joubert was killed at Novi, in his
first rencounter with Suwarrow; any attempt of his, at Paris, would have
failed; he had not yet acquired a sufficient degree of glory, of
consistency, and maturity. He was, by nature, calculated for all these
acquirements, but, at that moment, he was not adequately formed; he was
still too young, and that enterprise was then beyond his ability.”

The Emperor could not take more than one round; he found himself too
much fatigued, and was far from being well.

At half past eight o’clock, the Emperor ordered me to be called. He told
me that he had been obliged to take a bath, and thought he was a little
feverish. He felt that he had suddenly caught cold, but he had ceased to
cough since he was in the bath. He continued for a long time in the
water. He dined in it, and a small table was laid for me by the side.
The Emperor reverted to the history of Russia. “Had Peter the Great,” he
asked, “acted with wisdom in founding a capital at Petersburgh at so
vast an expense? Would not the results have been greater, had he
expended all his money at Moscow? What was his object? Had he
accomplished it?” I replied: “If Peter had remained at Moscow, his
nation would have continued Muscovite, a people altogether Asiatic; it
was necessary that it should be displaced for its reform and alteration.
He had, therefore, selected a position on the very frontiers, wrested
from the enemy, and in founding his capital, and accumulating all his
strength, he rendered it invulnerable; he connected himself with
European society; he established his power in the Baltic sea, by which
he could with ease prevent his natural enemies, the Poles and the
Swedes, from forming alliances, upon occasion, with the nations situated
in their rear.”

The Emperor said that “he was not altogether satisfied with these
reasons. Be it as it may,” he observed, “Moscow has disappeared, and who
can compute the wealth that has been swallowed up there? Let us
contemplate Paris, with the accumulation of buildings and of industry,
the work of centuries. Had its capital, for the 1400 years of its
existence, increased but a million a year, what a sum! Let us connect
with that the warehouses, the furniture, the union of sciences and the
arts, the complete establishments of trade and commerce, &c., and this
is the picture of Moscow; and all that vanished in an instant! What a
catastrophe! Does not the bare idea of it make one shudder?... I do not
think that it could be replaced, at the expense of two thousand
millions.”

He expatiated at great length on all these events, and let a word escape
him which was too characteristic not to be specially noted down by me.
The name of Rostopchin having been pronounced, I presumed to remark that
the colour at that time given to his patriotic action had very much
surprised me, for he had interested me instead of exciting my
indignation: nay, I had envied him!... The Emperor replied with singular
vivacity, and with a kind of contraction which betrayed vexation: “If
many at Paris had been capable of reading and feeling it in that way,
believe me, I should have applauded it! But I had no choice left me.”
Resuming the subject of Moscow, he said:—“Never, with all the powers of
poetry, have the fictions of the burning of Troy equalled the reality of
that of Moscow. The city was of wood, the wind was violent; all the
pumps had been taken away. It was literally an ocean of fire. Nothing
had been saved from it; our march was so rapid, our entrance so sudden.
We found even diamonds on the women’s toilets, they had fled so
precipitately. They wrote to us a short time afterwards that they had
sought to escape from the first excesses of a dangerous soldiery; that
they recommended their property to the generosity of the conquerors, and
would not fail to re-appear in the course of a few days to solicit their
kindness and testify their gratitude.

“The population was far from having plotted that atrocity. Even they
themselves delivered up to us three or four hundred criminals, who
escaped from prison, and had executed it,”—“But, Sire, may I presume to
ask, if Moscow had not been burnt, did not your Majesty intend to
establish your quarters there?”—“Certainly,” answered the Emperor, “and
I should then have held up the singular spectacle of an army wintering
in the midst of a hostile nation, pressing upon it from all points; it
would have been the ship beset by the ice. You would have been in France
without any intelligence from me for several months; but you would have
remained quiet, you would have acted wisely. Cambacèrés would, as usual,
have conducted affairs in my name, and all would have been as orderly as
if I had been present. The winter, in Russia, would have weighed heavy
on every one; the torpor would have been general. The spring also would
have returned for all the world. All would have been at once on their
legs, and it is well known that the French are as nimble as any others.

“On the first appearance of fine weather, I should have marched against
the enemy; I should have beaten them; I should have been master of their
empire. Alexander, be assured, would not have suffered me to proceed so
far. He would have agreed to all the conditions which I might have
dictated, and France would then have begun to enjoy all her advantages.
And, truly, my success depended upon a mere trifle. For I had undertaken
the expedition to fight against armed men, not against nature in the
violence of her wrath. I defeated armies, but I could not conquer the
flames, the frost, stupefaction, and death!... I was forced to yield to
fate. And, after all, how unfortunate for France!—indeed for all Europe!

[Illustration:

  THE BURNING OF MOSCOW.

  London: Published for Henry Colburn, March, 1836.
]

“Peace, concluded at Moscow, would have fulfilled and wound up my
hostile expeditions. It would have been, with respect to the grand
cause, the term of casualties and the commencement of security. A new
horizon, new undertakings, would have unfolded themselves, adapted, in
every respect, to the well-being and prosperity of all. The foundation
of the European system would have been laid, and my only remaining task
would have been its organization.

“Satisfied on these grand points, and every where at peace, I should
have also had my Congress and my Holy Alliance. These are plans which
were filched from me. In that assembly of all the sovereigns, we should
have discussed our interest in a family way, and settled our accounts
with the people, as a clerk does with his master.

“The cause of the age was victorious, the revolution accomplished; the
only point in question was to reconcile it with what it had not
destroyed. But that task belonged to me; I had for a long time been
making preparations for it, at the expense, perhaps, of my popularity.
No matter. I became the ark of the old and the new covenant, the natural
mediator between the old and the new order of things. I maintained the
principles and possessed the confidence of the one; I had identified
myself with the other. I belonged to them both; I should have acted
conscientiously in favour of each. My glory would have consisted in my
equity.”

“And, after having enumerated what he would have proposed between
sovereign and sovereign, and between sovereigns and their people, he
continued: “Powerful as we were, all that we might have conceded would
have appeared grand. It would have gained us the gratitude of the
people. At present, what they may extort will never seem enough for
them, and they will be uniformly distrustful and discontented.”

He next took a review of what he would have proposed for the prosperity,
the interest, the enjoyment, and the well-being, of the European
confederacy. He wished to establish the same principles, the same
system, every where—a European code; a European court of appeal, with
full powers to redress all wrong decisions, as our’s redresses at home
those of our tribunals; money of the same value, but in different coins;
the same weights, the same measures, the same laws.

“Thus Europe,” he said, “would soon have formed, in reality, but one and
the same people, and every one, who travelled, would have every where
found himself in one common country.”

He would have required that all the rivers should be navigable in
common; that the seas should be thrown open; that the great standing
armies should, in future, be reduced to the mere guards of the
sovereign.

In short, a multitude of ideas fell from him, the greater part of which
were new; some of the simplest nature, others altogether sublime,
relative to the different political, civil, and legislative branches; to
religion, to the arts, and commerce: they embraced every subject.

He concluded: “On my return to France, into the bosom of my country, at
once great, powerful, magnificent, at peace, and glorious, I would have
proclaimed the immutability of boundaries; all future wars, as purely
_defensive_; all new aggrandizement, as _anti-national_. I would have
associated my son with me in the empire; my dictatorship would have
terminated, and his constitutional reign commenced.

“Paris would have been the capital of the world, and the French the envy
of nations!... My leisure and my old age would have been devoted, in
company with the Empress, and, during the royal apprenticeship of my
son, to visiting slowly and with our own horses, like a plain country
couple, every corner of the empire; to receiving complaints, redressing
wrongs, founding monuments, and doing good every where and by every
means!... These also, my dear Las Cases, were among my reveries!!!”

The Emperor conversed a great deal about the interior of Russia, of the
prosperity of which, he said, we had no idea. He dwelt, at great length,
upon Moscow, which had, under every point of view, much surprised him,
and might bear a comparison with any of the capitals of Europe, the
greater number of which it surpassed. Here unfortunately I can find but
bare outlines in my notes, which it is impossible for me to fill up now.

He was particularly struck with the gilded spires of Moscow, and it was
that which induced him, on his return, to have the dome of the Invalids
regilt; he intended to embellish many other edifices at Paris in the
same manner.[10]

Footnote 10:

  Since the first appearance of this work, it has been remarked to me
  that this is an anachronism; as the gilding of the dome of the
  Invalids was begun before the campaign in Russia. It was the minarets
  of Cairo and not the steeples of Moscow which must have suggested the
  idea to Napoleon; and this was no doubt what he meant to say: it is
  easy to imagine that a mistake of this kind might be made by him in a
  conversation without any special object: in fact every body is liable
  to such mistakes.

As the city of Moscow seems to have been so different from the idea
which we have generally entertained of it in our Western world, I am
inclined to think that a description of it in this place, supplied by an
eye-witness, a distinguished person, attached to the expedition, will
not prove disagreeable. It is by Baron Larrey, surgeon-in-chief to the
grand army. I take it from a work of that celebrated character (Mémoires
de la Chirurgie Militaire), in no great circulation, on account,
perhaps, of its peculiarly scientific nature.

The relation begins at the moment when the French army was setting out
for Moscow, after the battle of Mozaisk or of the Moskowa.

“We were hardly a few miles off from Mozaisk, when we were all surprised
at finding ourselves, notwithstanding the vicinity of the spot to one of
the greatest capitals in the world, on a sandy, arid, and completely
desert plain. The mournful aspect of that solitude, which discouraged
the soldiers, seemed an omen of the entire abandonment of Moscow, and of
the misfortunes which awaited us in that city, from the opulence of
which we had promised ourselves such advantages.

“The army marched, with difficulty, over that tract. The horses were
harassed, and exhausted with hunger and thirst, for water was as rare as
forage. The men had also a great deal to suffer. They were, in fact,
overwhelmed with fatigue, and in want of all subsistence. The troops had
not, for a long time, received any rations, and the small quantity of
provisions found at Mozaisk was only sufficient for the young and old
guard. A considerable number of the former corps fell victims to their
abuse of the spirits of the country. They were observed to quit their
comrades a few paces, to totter, whirl round, and afterwards fall on
their knees or sit down involuntarily; they remained immoveable in that
attitude, and expired shortly afterwards, without uttering a single
complaint. These young men were pre-disposed to the pernicious effects
of that liquor by languor, privations and excessive fatigue.

“We arrived, however, on the evening of the 14th of September, in one of
the suburbs of Moscow; we there learnt that the Russian army had, in its
passage through the city, carried off all the citizens and public
functionaries, some of the lower classes and servants alone were left;
so that, in going through the principal streets of that great city,
which we entered the following morning, we scarcely met any one; all the
houses were completely abandoned. But what very much surprised us was to
see the fire break out in several remote quarters, where none of our
troops had yet been, and particularly in the bazar of the Kremlin, an
immense building, with porticoes which have some resemblance to those of
the Palais Royal at Paris.

“After what we had witnessed on our passage through Little Russia, we
were astonished at the vastness of Moscow, at the great number of
churches and palaces which it contained, at the beautiful architecture
of those edifices, at the commodious disposition of the principal
houses, and all the objects of luxury which were found in the greater
part of them. The streets in general were spacious, regular, and well
laid out. Nothing had the appearance of discordance throughout that
city. Every thing announced its wealth, and the immense trade it carried
on in the productions of the four quarters of the world.

“The variety displayed in the construction of the palaces, houses, and
churches, was an infinite addition to the beauty of the city. There were
places which, by the peculiar kind of architecture of the different
edifices, indicated the nations that generally inhabited them; thus, the
residence of the Franks, Chinese, Indians, and Germans, was easily
distinguished. The Kremlin might be considered as the citadel of Moscow;
it is in the centre of the town, situated on an eminence sufficiently
elevated, surrounded by a wall with bastions, and flanked, at regular
distances, by towers, mounted with cannon. The bazaar, which has been
already noticed, usually filled with the merchandize of India, and
valuable furs, had become the prey of the flames, and the only articles
preserved were those which had been deposited in the vaults, where the
soldiers penetrated, after the fire that consumed the whole of the
exterior of that beautiful edifice. The palace of the Emperors, that of
the senate, the archives, the arsenal, and two very ancient churches,
occupy the rest of the Kremlin. These different buildings, of a rich
style of architecture, form a magnificent appearance about the parade.
One might imagine one’s self transported to the public place of ancient
Athens, where the Areopagus and the temple of Minerva on one side, and
the academy and the arsenal on the other, were the objects of
admiration. A cylindrical tower rises between the two churches, in the
form of a column, known by the name of Yvan’s tower; it is rather an
Egyptian minaret, within which several bells, of different sizes, are
hung. At the foot of this tower, is seen a bell of a prodigious
magnitude, which has been noticed by all the historians. The whole of
the city and its environs are seen from the top of the towers; it looks
like a star, with four forked rays. The city has a most picturesque
appearance, from the variegated colours of the roofs of the houses, and
from the gold and silver which cover the domes and the tops of the
steeples, of which there is a considerable number. Nothing can equal the
richness of one of the churches of the Kremlin (it was the burial-place
of the Emperors); its walls are covered with plates of silver gilt, five
or six lines thick, on which the history of the Old and New Testament is
represented in relievo; the lustres and candelabra, of massy silver,
were particularly remarkable for their extraordinary size.

“The hospitals, to which my attention was peculiarly directed, are
worthy of the most civilized nation in the world; I divide them into
military and civil. The great military hospital is divided into three
parts, forming altogether a parallelogram. The principal part was
constructed on the side of a great road, opposite to an immense barrack,
which may be compared to the military school at Paris. Two lateral
buildings, intersecting the first at right angles, inclose the court,
which communicates with a fine and extensive garden appropriated to the
use of the sick. A portico, with columns of the composite order, forms
the front of this building, which is two stories high. At the entrance
is a spacious lobby, with corresponding doors to the wards on the
ground-floor, and a large and magnificent staircase leading to the upper
stories. The wards occupy the entire length of the building, and the
windows on each side reach from the ceiling to the floor; they are made
with double sashes, as is customary throughout Russia, and are
completely closed in winter; stoves are placed in the inside at suitable
distances. The wards contain four rows of beds of the same kind,
separated by the requisite space for wholesomeness: each row consists of
fifty beds, and the total number may be estimated at more than three
thousand; the hospital contains fourteen principal wards of very nearly
the same extent. The offices, dispensary, kitchen, and other
accessories, are very commodiously situated, in separate places, at a
convenient distance from the wards.

“The civil hospitals are equally entitled to notice. The four principal
are those of Cheremetow, Galitzin, Alexander, and the foundlings.

“The first, remarkable for its form, its structure, and its internal
arrangements, was used to receive the sick and wounded belonging to the
guard.

“This hospital, which is three stories high, is built in the form of a
crescent; the requisite offices are situated in the rear. A beautiful
portico, projecting from the centre of the half-moon, forms the entrance
of a chapel which occupies the middle of the edifice; this chapel,
surmounted by a dome, is the central point of all the wards, and
contains the mausoleum of the Prince who founded the hospital: it is
adorned with columns in stucco, statues, and beautiful pictures. The
dispensary is one of the finest and best supplied that I know.

“The Foundling Hospital, situated on the banks of the Moscowa, and
protected by the cannon of the Kremlin, is indisputably the largest and
noblest establishment of the kind in Europe. It consists of two masses
of building; the first, where the entrance is placed, is appropriated to
the residence of the Governor, who is selected from the old generals of
the army, of the board of management, of the medical officers, and of
all those employed in the service of the hospital. The second forms a
perfect square. In the centre of the court, which is very spacious, is a
reservoir, that supplies the whole of the establishment with water from
the river. Each of the sides consists of four stories, round which runs
a regular corridor, not very broad, yet sufficiently spacious for the
admission of air, and the accommodation of persons passing through it.
The wards occupy the remainder of the breadth, and the whole length of
each wing of the building. There are two rows of beds with curtains in
each ward, their size corresponds with that of the children: the boys
are kept separate from the girls, and the greatest cleanliness and
regularity are observed.

“We had scarcely taken possession of the city, and succeeded in
extinguishing the fire, kindled by the Russians in the most beautiful
quarters, when, in consequence of two principal causes, the flames again
broke out in the most violent manner, spread rapidly from one street to
another, and involved the whole place in one common ruin. The first of
these causes is justly reported to have been the desperate resolution of
a certain class of Russians, who were said to have been confined in the
prisons, the doors of which were thrown open on the departure of the
army; these wretches, whether incited by superior authority, or by their
own feelings, with the view, no doubt, of plunder, openly ran from
palace to palace, and from house to house, setting fire to every thing
that fell in their way. The French patroles, although numerous and on
the alert, were unable to prevent them. I saw several of those
miscreants taken in the act; lighted matches and combustibles were found
in their possession. The pain of death inflicted upon those caught in
the actual commission of the atrocity made no impression on the others,
and the fire raged three days and three nights without interruption; in
vain houses were pulled down by our soldiers, the flames quickly
overleaped the vacant space, and the buildings thus insulated, were set
on fire in the twinkling of an eye. The second cause must be attributed
to the violence of the equinoctial winds, which are always very powerful
in those parts, and by means of which the conflagration increased and
extended its ravages with extraordinary activity.

“It would be difficult, under any circumstances, to imagine a picture
more horrible than that with which our eyes were afflicted. It was more
particularly during night, between the 18th and 19th of September, the
period when the fire was at the highest pitch, that its effects
presented a terrific spectacle: the weather was fine and dry, the wind
continuing to blow from East to North, or from North to East. During
that night, the dreadful image of which will never be effaced from my
memory, the whole of the city was on fire. Large columns of flames of
various colours shot up from every quarter, entirely covered the
horizon, and diffused a glaring light and a scorching heat to a
considerable distance. These masses of fire, driven by the violence of
the winds in all directions, were accompanied in their rise and rapid
movement, by a dreadful whizzing and by thundering explosions, the
result of the combustion of gunpowder, saltpetre, oil, resin, and
brandy, with which the greater part of the houses and shops had been
filled. The varnished iron plates, with which the buildings were
covered, were speedily loosened by the heat, and whirled far away; large
pieces of burning beams and rafters of fir were carried to a great
distance, and contributed to extend the conflagration to houses which
were considered in no danger, on account of their remoteness. Every one
was struck with terror and consternation. The guard, with the
head-quarters and the staff of the army, left the Kremlin and the city,
and formed a camp at Petrowski, a mansion which belonged to Peter the
Great, on the road to Petersburg. I remained with a very small number of
my comrades, in a house built of stone, which stood alone, and was
situated on the top of the quarter of the Franks, close to the Kremlin.
I was there enabled to observe all the phenomena of that tremendous
conflagration. We had sent our equipage to the camp, and kept ourselves
constantly on the look-out, to be prepared for, or to prevent, danger.

“The lower classes, who had remained at Moscow, driven from house to
house by the fire, uttered the most lamentable cries; extremely anxious
to preserve what was most valuable to them, they loaded themselves with
packages, which they could hardly sustain, and which they frequently
abandoned to escape from the flames. The women, impelled by a very
natural feeling of humanity, carried one or two children on their
shoulders, and dragged the others along by the hand; and, in order to
avoid the death which threatened them on every side, they ran, with
their petticoats tucked up, to take shelter in the corners of the
streets and squares; but they were soon compelled, by the intenseness of
the heat, to abandon those spots, and to fly with precipitation by any
way that was open to them, sometimes without being able to extricate
themselves from that kind of labyrinth, where many of them met with a
miserable end. I saw old men, whose long beards had been caught by the
flames, drawn on small carts by their own children, who endeavoured to
rescue them from that real Tartarus.

“As for our soldiers, tormented with hunger and thirst, they exposed
themselves to every danger, to obtain, in the burning cellars and shops,
eatables, wines, liquors, or any other article more or less useful. They
were seen running through the streets, pell-mell with the broken-hearted
inhabitants, carrying away every thing they could snatch from the
ravages of this dreadful conflagration. At length, in the course of
eight or ten days, this immense and superb city was reduced to ashes,
with the exception of the Kremlin palace, some large houses, and all the
churches: these edifices are built of stone.

“This calamity threw the army into great consternation, and was a
presage to us of more serious misfortunes. We all thought that we should
no longer find either subsistence, cloth, or any other necessary for
equipping the troops, and of which we were in the most urgent want.
Could a more dismal idea suggest itself to our imagination? The head
quarters were, however, after the fire, again established at the
Kremlin, and the guard sent to some houses of the Franks’ quarter, which
had been preserved. Every one resumed the exercise of his duties.

“Magazines of flour, meal, salt-fish, oil, wine and liquors, were
discovered by dint of perseverance. Some were served out to the troops,
but there was too great a wish to spare or hoard up these articles, and
that excess of precaution, which is sometimes a mere pretext, induced us
to burn or leave behind us, in the end, provisions of every kind, from
which we might have derived the greatest benefit, and which would have
even been sufficient for the wants of the army for more than six months,
had we remained at Moscow. The same conduct was pursued with regard to
the stuffs and furs, which ought to have been immediately worked up for
the purpose of supplying our troops with all the clothing capable of
preserving them, as much as possible, from the inclemency of the cold
that was at hand. The soldiers, who never think of the future, so far
from obviating, on their part and for their own advantage, that want of
precaution, were solely engaged in searching for wines, liquors, and
articles of gold and silver, and despised every other consideration.

“This unexpected abundance, which was owing to the indefatigable
researches of the troops, was attended with a bad effect on their
discipline and on the health of those who were intemperate. That motive
alone ought to have made us hasten our departure for Poland. Moscow
became a new Capua to our army. The enemy’s generals flattered ours with
the hopes of peace; the preliminaries were to be signed from day to day.
Meanwhile clouds of Cossacks covered our cantonments and carried off
every day a great number of our foragers. General Kutusoff was
collecting the wreck of his army and strengthening himself with the
recruits who joined him from all parts. Imperceptibly, and under various
pretences of pacification, his advanced posts drew near to ours.
Finally, the period of negotiation had arrived, and it was at the moment
in which the French ambassador was to obtain a first decision, that
Prince Joachim’s corps d’armée was surrounded. It was with difficulty
that our general, the ambassador, surmounted the obstacles which were
opposed to his return to Moscow. Several parties of our troops and some
pieces of cannon had been already carried off. The different corps of
this advanced guard, which were at first dispersed, were nevertheless
rallied, broke the Russian column that hemmed them in, took up a
favourable position, and charged successively the enemy’s numerous
cavalry, which they repulsed with vigour, retaking part of the artillery
and some of the soldiers made prisoners in the first onset. At length,
the arrival of General Lauriston, and of the wounded, was to us, at head
quarters, a confirmation that hostilities would be resumed. Orders were
immediately given for the sudden departure of the army; the drum beat to
arms, and all the corps prepared to execute that precipitate movement.
Some provisions were hastily collected and the march commenced on the
19th of October.”

ON THE CORONATION, &C.—DECREES OF BERLIN AND MILAN.—THE GRAND CAUSE OF
  THE HATRED OF THE ENGLISH.

25th.—The weather has become fine in every respect. The Emperor
breakfasted in the tent and sent for us all. The conversation turned
upon the ceremonies of the coronation. He asked for particulars from one
of us, who had been present, but was unable to satisfy him. He made the
same inquiries of another, but the latter had not seen it. “Where were
you then at that time?” asked the Emperor.—“At Paris, Sire.”—“How then!
you did not see the coronation!”—“No Sire.” The Emperor, then casting a
side glance at him, and taking him by the ear, said; “Were you so absurd
as to carry your aristocracy to that point?”—“But, Sire, my hour was not
come.”—“But at least you saw the retinue?”—“Ah! Sire, had my curiosity
prevailed, I should have hastened to witness what was most worthy and
most interesting to be seen. I had, however, a ticket of admission, and
I preferred presenting it to the English lady whom I lately mentioned to
your Majesty, and who, by way of parenthesis, caught a cold there, that
nearly killed her. For my own part I remained quietly at home.”—“Ah,
that is too much for me to put up with,” said the Emperor, “the
villanous aristocrat! How! And you were really guilty of such an
absurdity?”—“Alas! I was,” replied the accused, “and yet here I am near
you, and at St. Helena.” The Emperor smiled, and let go the ear.

After breakfast, a captain of the English artillery, who had been six
years at the Isle of France, called upon me. He was to sail for Europe
the next day. He entreated me in a thousand ways to procure him the
happiness of seeing the Emperor. He would, he said, give all he had in
the world for such a favour; his gratitude would be boundless, &c.

We conversed together for a long time; the Emperor was taking his round
in the calash. On his return, I was fortunate enough to fulfil the
English officer’s wishes. The Emperor received him for upwards of a
quarter of an hour; his joy was extreme, as he was aware that the favour
became every day more rare. Every thing about the Emperor had struck
him, he declared, in a most extraordinary manner; his features, his
affability, the sound of his voice, his expressions, the questions he
had asked; he was, he exclaimed, a hero, a god!...

The weather was delightful. The Emperor continued to walk in the garden
in the midst of us. He discussed the failure of a negotiation undertaken
by one of us; a business which the Emperor had judged very easy, but
which turned out to be of the most delicate nature for the person
entrusted with it. The object of it was to prevail upon some English
officers to publish a certain paper in England.

The Emperor expressed his disapprobation of the failure in his usual
mode of reasoning, and with the intelligence and point that are familiar
to him: he was, however, very much disappointed at it: his observations
were rather strong; he pushed them to a degree of ill humour of which
the person he found fault with had never, perhaps, before, received any
proofs. At length, he concluded with saying: “After all, Sir, would you
not have accepted yourself what you proposed to others, had you been in
their place?”—“No, Sire.”—“Why not? Well then,” he added, in a tone of
reproof, “you should not be my Minister of Police.” “And your Majesty
would be in the right,” quickly replied the other, who felt himself
vexed in his turn; “I feel no inclination whatever for such an office.”
The Emperor, seeing him enter the saloon, a little before dinner, said:
“Ah! there is our little Officer of Police! Come, approach, my little
Officer of Police;” and he pinched his ear. Although hours had passed
since the warm conversation took place, the Emperor recollected it; he
knew that the person who had been the subject of it was full of
sensibility, and it was evident that he wished to efface the impression
it had made upon him. These are characteristic shades, and those which
arise from the most trifling causes are the most natural and the most
marked.

After dinner, the Emperor was led, by the turn which the conversation
took, to review the special subject of his maritime quarrel with
England. “Her pretensions to blockade on paper,” he observed, “produced
my famous Berlin decree. The British council, in a fit of resentment,
issued its orders; it established a right of toll on the seas. I
instantly replied by the celebrated Milan decrees, which denationalized
every flag that submitted to the English acts; and it was then that the
war became, in England truly personal. Every one connected with trade
was enraged against me. England was exasperated at a struggle and
energy, of which she had no example. She had uniformly found those who
had preceded me more complaisant.”

The Emperor explained, on a later occasion, the means, by which he had
forced the Americans to make war against the English. He had, he said,
discovered the way of connecting their interests with their rights; for
people, he remarked, fight much more readily for the former than for the
latter.

At present, the Emperor expected, he said, some approaching attempt, on
the part of the English, on the sovereignty of the seas, for the
establishment of the right of universal toll, &c. “It is,” said he, “one
of the principal resources left them for discharging their debts, for
extricating themselves from the abyss into which they are plunged; in a
word, for getting rid of their embarrassments. If they have among them
an enterprising genius, a man of a strong intellect, they will certainly
undertake something of that kind. Nobody is powerful enough to oppose
it, and they set up their claim with a sort of justice. They may plead,
in its justification, that it was for the safety of Europe they involved
themselves in difficulties; that they succeeded, and that they are
entitled to some compensation. And then, the only ships of war in Europe
are theirs. They reign, in fact, at present, over the seas. There is an
end to existence of public rights when the ballance is the broken, &c.,
&c.

“The English may now be omnipotent, if they will but confine themselves
to their navy. But they will endanger their superiority, complicate
their affairs, and insensibly lose their importance, if they persevere
in keeping soldiers on the continent.”

              ACCOUNT OF THE CAMPAIGN OF WATERLOO DICTATED
                              BY NAPOLEON.

26th.—The Emperor went out early in the morning, before seven o’clock;
he did not wish to disturb any of us. He began to work alone in the
garden beneath the tent, where he sent for us all to breakfast with him.
He continued there until two o’clock.

At dinner, he conversed a great deal about our situation in the island.
He would not, he said, leave Longwood; he did not care for any visitors;
but he was desirous that we should take some diversion, and find out
some means of amusement. It would, he said, be a pleasure to him to see
us move about and get abroad more.

The narrative of the battle of Waterloo, which the Emperor had dictated
to General Gourgaud, was read by his desire. What a story! It is painful
to think of it. The destinies of France suspended by so slight a thread!

This production was published in Europe in 1820. The measures contrived
to transmit it clandestinely from St. Helena proved successful, in spite
of every kind of vigilance. The instant this narrative appeared, every
body was agreed as to its author. An exclamation burst from every
quarter that Napoleon alone was capable of describing in that manner,
and it is confidently stated that the Generalissimo, his antagonist,
expressed himself precisely in the same way. What noble chapters! It
would be impossible to attempt an analysis of them, or to pretend to
convey their excellence in terms adequate to their merits. We literally
transcribe, however, in this place, the last pages, containing, in the
shape of a summary, nine observations of Napoleon, on the faults with
which he has been reproached in that campaign.

They are points which will become classic, and we are of opinion that
our readers will not be displeased at again finding here subjects which
become, every time the occasion presents itself, topics of earnest and
important discussion.

We shall preface these observations with a description, also from
Napoleon’s dictation, of the resources which France still possessed
after the loss of the battle.

“The situation of France was critical, but not desperate, after the
battle of Waterloo. Every preparatory measure had been taken, on the
supposition of the failure of the attack upon Belgium. Seventy thousand
men were rallied on the 27th, between Paris and Laon; from 25 to 30,000,
including the depôts of the guard, were on their march from Paris and
the depots; General Rapp, with 25,000 men, chosen troops, was expected
on the Marne, in the beginning of July; all the losses sustained in the
_materiel_ of the artillery had been repaired. Paris, alone, contained
500 pieces of field-artillery, and only 170 had been lost. Thus an army
of 120,000 men, equal to that which had passed the Sambre on the 15th,
with a train of artillery, consisting of 350 pieces of cannon, would
cover Paris by the 1st of July. That capital possessed, independently of
these means, for its defence, 36,000 men of the National Guard, 30,000
sharpshooters, 6000 gunners, 600 battering cannon, formidable
entrenchments on the right bank of the Seine, and, in a few days, those
of the left bank would have been entirely completed. The Anglo-Dutch and
Prusso-Saxon armies, diminished, however, by more than 80,000 men, and
no longer exceeding 140,000, could not cross the Somme with more than
90,000; they would have to wait there for the co-operation of the
Austrian and Russian armies, which could not be on the Marne before the
15th of July. Paris had, consequently, twenty-five days to prepare for
its defence, to complete the arming of its inhabitants, its
fortifications, its supplies of provisions, and to draw troops from
every point of France. Even by the 15th of July, not more than 30, or
40,000 men could have arrived on the Rhine. The mass of the Russian and
Austrian armies could not take the field before a later period. Neither
arms, nor ammunition, nor officers were wanting in the capital; the
number of sharpshooters might be easily augmented to 80,000, and the
field artillery could be increased to 600 pieces.

“Marshal Suchet, in conjunction with General Lécourbe, would have had,
at the same time, upwards of 30,000 men before Lyons, independently of
the garrison of that city, which would have been well armed, well
supplied with provisions, and well protected by entrenchments. The
defence of all the strong places was secured; they were commanded by
chosen officers, and garrisoned by faithful troops. Every thing might be
repaired, but decision, energy, and firmness, on the part of the
officers, of the Government, of the Chambers, and of the whole nation,
were necessary. It was requisite that France should be animated by the
sentiment of honour, of glory, of national independence; that she should
fix her eyes upon Rome after the battle of Cannæ, and not upon Carthage
after that of Zama!!! If France had raised herself to that height, she
would have been invincible. Her people contained more of the military
elements than any other people in the world. The _materiel_ of war
existed in abundance, and was adequate to every want.

“On the 21st of June, Marshal Blucher and the Duke of Wellington entered
the French territory at the head of two columns. On the 22nd, the powder
magazine at Avesnes took fire, and the place surrendered. On the 24th,
the Prussians entered Guise, and the Duke of Wellington was at Cambray.
He was at Peronne on the 26th. During the whole of this time, the
fortresses on the first, second, and third line in Flanders were
invested. The two generals learned, however, on the 25th, the Emperor’s
abdication, which had taken place on the 22d, the insurrection of the
Chambers, the discouragement occasioned by these circumstances in the
army, and the hopes excited among our internal enemies. From that
moment, they thought only of marching upon the capital, under the walls
of which they arrived at the latter end of June, with fewer than 90,000
men; an enterprise that would have proved fatal to them, and drawn on
their total ruin, had they hazarded it in the presence of Napoleon: but
that Prince had abdicated!!! The troops of the line at Paris, more than
6000 men of the depôts of the guard, the sharpshooters of the National
Guard, chosen from among the people of that great capital, were devoted
to him; they had it in their power to exterminate the domestic enemy!!!
But in order to explain the motives which regulated his conduct in that
important crisis, which was attended with such fatal results both for
him and for France, the narrative must go back to an earlier period.

_First Observation._—“The Emperor has been reproached, 1st, With having
resigned the dictatorship, at the moment when France stood most in need
of a dictator; 2nd, With having altered the constitutions of the empire,
at a moment when it was necessary to think only of preserving it from
invasion; 3rd, With having permitted the Vendeans to be alarmed, who
had, at first, refused to take arms against the imperial government;
4th, With having assembled the Chambers, when he ought to have assembled
the army; 5th, With having abdicated and left France at the mercy of a
divided and inexperienced assembly; for, in fine, if it be true, that it
was impossible for the Prince to save the country without the confidence
of the nation, it is not less true that the nation could not, in these
critical circumstances, preserve either its happiness or its
independence without Napoleon.

_Second Observation._—“The art, with which the movements of the
different bodies of the army were concealed from the enemy’s knowledge,
on the opening of the campaign, cannot be too attentively remarked.
Marshal Blucher and the Duke of Wellington were surprised; they saw
nothing, knew nothing, of the operations which were carrying on near
their advanced posts.

“In order to attack the two hostile armies, the French might have
out-flanked their right or left, or penetrated their centre. In the
first case, they might have advanced by the way of Lisle, and fallen in
with the Anglo-Dutch army; in the second, they might have moved forward
by Givet and Charlemont, and have fallen in with the Prusso-Saxon army.
These two armies would have remained united, since they must have been
pressed the one upon the other, from the right to the left, and from the
left to the right. The Emperor adopted the plan of covering his
movements with the Sambre, and piercing the line of the two armies at
Charleroi, their point of junction, executing his manœuvres with
rapidity and skill. He thus discovered, in the secrets of the art, means
to supply the place of 100,000 men, whom he needed. The plan was
executed with boldness and prudence.

_Third Observation._—“The character of several generals had been
affected by the events of 1814; they had lost somewhat of that spirit,
of that resolution, and that confidence, by which they had gained so
much glory and so much contributed to the success of former campaigns.

“1st.—On the 15th of June, the third corps was to march at three o’clock
in the morning, and arrive at Charleroi at ten; it did not arrive until
three o’clock in the afternoon.

“2ndly.—The same day the attack on the woods in front of Fleurus, which
had been ordered at four in the afternoon, did not take place until
seven. Night came on before the troops could enter Fleurus, where the
Commander in Chief had intended to establish his head-quarters the same
day. The loss of seven hours was very vexatious on the opening of a
campaign.

“3rdly.—Ney received orders to advance on the 16th with 43,000 men, who
composed the left under his command, in front of Quatre-Bras, to take up
a position there at day-break, and even to entrench himself; he
hesitated, and lost eight hours. The Prince of Orange, with only 9000
men, retained, on the 16th until three o’clock in the afternoon, that
important position. When at length, the Marshal received at twelve
o’clock at noon the order dated from Fleurus, and saw, that the Emperor
was on the point of attacking the Prussians, he advanced against
Quatre-Bras, but only with half his force, leaving the other half to
cover his retreat at the distance of two leagues in the rear; he forgot
it until six in the evening, when he felt the want of it for his own
defence. In other campaigns, that General would have made himself master
of the position in front of Quatre-Bras at six o’clock in the morning;
he would have routed and captured the whole of the Belgic division, and
either turned the Prussian army by sending a detachment on the Namur
road to fall on the rear of their line of battle; or, by moving rapidly
along the road to Gennapes, he would have surprised and destroyed the
Brunswick division on its march, and the fifth English division as it
advanced from Brussels. He would have afterwards marched to meet the
third and fourth English divisions, which were advancing by way of
Nivelles, and were both destitute of cavalry and artillery, and
overwhelmed with fatigue. Ney, who was always first in the heat of
battle, forgot the troops that were not directly engaged. The courage
which a Commander in Chief should display is different from that of a
general of division, as that of the latter ought to differ from the
bravery of a captain of grenadiers.

“4thly.—The advanced guard of the French army did not arrive on the
16th, in front of Waterloo, until six o’clock in the evening; it would
have arrived at three but for some vexatious hesitations. The Emperor
was very much mortified at the delay, and, pointing at the sun,
exclaimed, “What would I now give to have the power of Joshua, and to
stop its progress for two hours!”

_Fourth Observation._—“The French soldier never displayed more bravery,
cheerfulness, and enthusiasm; he was animated with the sentiment of his
superiority over all the soldiers of Europe. His confidence in the
Emperor was altogether unabated; it had, perhaps, increased: but he was
suspicious and distrustful of his other Commanders. The treasons of 1814
were always in his thoughts, and he was uneasy at every movement which
he did not understand; he thought he was betrayed. At the moment when
the first cannon-shots were firing near St. Amand, an old corporal
approached the Emperor and said: “Sire, beware of General Soult; be
assured that he is a traitor.”—“Fear nothing,” replied the Emperor, “I
can answer for him as for myself.” In the middle of the battle, an
officer informed Marshal Soult that General Vandamme had gone over to
the enemy, and that his soldiers demanded, with loud cries, that the
Emperor should be made acquainted with it. At the close of the battle, a
dragoon, with his sabre covered with blood, galloped up to him crying,
“Sire, come instantly to the division. General Dhénin is persuading the
dragoons to go over to the enemy.”—“Did you hear him?“—“No, Sire, but an
officer, who is looking for you, saw him and ordered me to tell your
Majesty.” During this time, the gallant General Dhénin received a cannon
shot, which carried off one of his legs, after he had repulsed the
enemy’s charge.

“On the 14th, in the evening, Lieutenant-General B——, Colonel C——, and
V——, an officer of the staff, deserted and went over to the enemy. Their
names will be held in execration as long as the French shall constitute
a nation. The uneasy feelings of the troops had been considerably
aggravated by that desertion. It appears nearly certain that the cry of
Sauve _qui peut_ was raised among the soldiers of the fourth division of
the first corps, on the evening of the battle of Waterloo, when Marshal
Blucher attacked the village of La Haye. That village was not defended
as it ought to have been.[11] It is equally probable that several
officers, charged with the communication of orders, disappeared. But, if
some officers deserted, not a single private was guilty of that crime.
Several killed themselves on the field of battle, where they lay
wounded, when they learned the defeat of the army.

Footnote 11:

  General Durutte, who was mutilated on that disastrous day, and who
  commanded the fourth division here mentioned, declares that there must
  be some mistake in regard to the number specified in this dictation of
  Napoleon’s; or that there was some inaccuracy or malice in the report
  that was made to him.

_Fifth Observation._—“In the battle of the 17th, the French army was
divided into three bodies; 69,000 men under the Emperor’s command,
marched against Brussels by the way of Charleroi; 34,000, under the
command of Marshal Grouchy, directed their operations against that
capital by way of Wavres, in pursuit of the Prussians; 7 or 8000 men
remained on the field of battle at Ligny, of whom 3000, belonging to
Girard’s division, were employed in assisting the wounded, and in
forming a reserve for any unexpected casualty at Quatre-Bras; and 4 or
5000 continued with the reserve at Fleurus and at Charleroi. The 34,000
men under the command of Marshal Grouchy, with 108 pieces of cannon,
were sufficient to drive the Prussian rear-guard from any position it
might take up, to press upon the retreat of the conquered army, and to
keep it in check. It was a glorious result of the victory of Ligny, to
be thus enabled to oppose 34,000 men to an army which had consisted of
120,000. The 69,000 men, under the Emperor’s command, were sufficient to
beat the Anglo-Dutch army, composed of 90,000. The disproportion which
existed on the 15th between the two belligerent masses in the ratio of
one to two, was materially changed, and it no longer exceeded three to
four. Had the Anglo-Dutch army defeated the 69,000 men opposed to it,
Napoleon might have been reproached with having ill-calculated his
measures; but it is undeniable, even from the enemy’s admission, that,
unless General Blucher had arrived, the Anglo-Dutch army would have been
driven from the field of battle between eight and nine o’clock at night.
If Marshal Blucher had not arrived at eight with his first and second
corps, the march on Brussels with two columns, during the battle of the
17th, would have been attended with several advantages. The left would
have pressed upon and kept in check the Anglo-Dutch army; the right,
under the command of Marshal Grouchy, would have pursued and restrained
the operations of the Prusso-Saxon army; and in the evening, the whole
of the French army would have effected its junction on a line of less
than five leagues from Mont Saint Jean to Wavres, with its advanced
posts on the edge of the forest. But the fault committed by Marshal
Grouchy, in stopping on the 17th at Gembloux, having marched scarcely
two leagues in the course of the day, instead of pushing on three
leagues more in front of Wavres, was aggravated and rendered irreparable
by that which he committed the following day, the 18th, in losing twelve
hours, and arriving at four o’clock in the afternoon in front of Wavres,
when he should have been there at six in the morning.

“1st,—Grouchy, charged with the pursuit of Marshal Blucher, lost sight
of him for twenty-four hours, from four o’clock in the afternoon of the
17th until a quarter past twelve at noon on the 18th.

“2dly,—The movement of the cavalry on the plain, while General Bulow’s
attack was not yet repulsed, proved a distressing accident. It was the
intention of the Commander in Chief to order that movement, but not
until an hour later, and then it was to have been sustained by the
sixteen battalions of infantry belonging to the guard, with one hundred
pieces of cannon.

“3dly.—The horse grenadiers and the dragoons of the guard, under the
command of General Guyot, engaged without orders. Thus, at five in the
afternoon, the army found itself without a reserve of cavalry. If, at
half past eight, that reserve had existed, the storm which swept all
before it on the field of battle would have been dispersed, the enemy’s
charges of cavalry driven back, and the two armies would have slept on
the field, notwithstanding the successive arrivals of General Bulow and
Marshal Blucher: the advantage would also have been in favour of the
French army, as Marshal Grouchy’s 34,000 men, with 108 pieces of cannon,
were fresh troops and bivouacked on the field of battle. The enemy’s two
armies would have placed themselves in the night under cover of the
forest of Soignes. The constant practice in every battle was for the
horse-grenadiers and the dragoons of the guard never to lose sight of
the Emperor, and never to make a charge but in consequence of an order
verbally given by that Prince to the General who commanded them.

“Marshal Mortier, who was Commander in Chief of the guards, gave up the
command on the 15th, at Beaumont, just as hostilities were on the point
of commencing, and no one was appointed in his stead, which was attended
with several inconvenient results.

_Sixth Observation._—“1st, The French army manœuvred on the right of
the Sambre, on the 13th and 14th. It encamped, the night between the
14th and 15th, within half a league of the Prussian advanced posts; and
yet Marshal Blucher had no knowledge of it, and when, on the morning of
the 15th, he learned at his head-quarters at Namur that the Emperor had
entered Charleroi, the Prusso-Saxon army was still cantoned over an
extent of thirty leagues; two days were necessary for him to effect the
junction of his troops. It was his duty, from the 15th of May, to
advance his head-quarters to Fleurus, to concentrate the cantonments of
his army within a radius of eight leagues, with his advanced posts on
the Meuse and Sambre. His army might then have been assembled at Ligny
on the 15th at noon, to await in that position the attack of the French
army, or to march against it in the evening of the 15th, for the purpose
of driving it into the Sambre.

“2dly.—Yet, notwithstanding this surprise of Marshal Blucher, he
persisted in the project of collecting his troops on the heights of
Ligny, behind Fleurus, exposing himself to the hazard of being attacked
before the arrival of his army. On the morning of the 16th, he had
collected but two corps, and the French army was already at Fleurus. The
third corps joined in the course of the day, but the fourth, commanded
by General Bulow, was unable to get up in time for the battle. Marshal
Blucher, the instant he learned the arrival of the French at Charleroi,
that is to say, on the evening of the 15th, ought to have assigned, as a
point of junction for his troops, neither Fleurus nor Ligny, which were
under the enemy’s cannon, but Wavres, which the French could not have
reached until the 17th. He would have also had the whole of the 16th,
and the night between the 16th and 17th, to effect the total junction of
his army.

“3dly.—After having lost the battle of Ligny, the Prussian General,
instead of making his retreat on Wavres, ought to have effected it upon
the army of the Duke of Wellington, whether at Quatre-Bras, where the
latter had maintained himself, or at Waterloo. The whole of Marshal
Blucher’s retreat on the morning of the 17th was contrary to common
sense, since the two armies, which were, on the evening of the 16th,
little more than three miles from each other, and had a fine road for
their point of communication, in consequence of which their junction
might have been considered as effected, found themselves, on the evening
of the 17th, separated by a distance of nearly twelve miles, and by
defiles and impassable ways.

“The Prussian General violated the three grand rules of war; 1st, To
keep his cantonments near each other; 2dly, To assign as a point of
junction a place where his troops can all assemble before those of the
enemy; 3dly, To make his retreat upon his reinforcements.

_Seventh Observation._—“1st, The Duke of Wellington was surprised in his
cantonments; he ought to have concentrated them on the 15th of May, at
eight leagues about Brussels, and kept advanced guards on the roads from
Flanders. The French army was for three days manœuvring close upon
his advanced posts; it had commenced hostilities twenty four hours, and
its head-quarters had been twelve hours at Charleroi, and yet the
English General was at Brussels, ignorant of what was passing, and all
the cantonments of his army were still in full security, extended over a
space of more than twenty leagues.

“2dly.—The Prince of Saxe-Weimar, who belonged to the Anglo-Dutch army,
was, on the 16th, at four o’clock in the afternoon in position before
Frasne, and knew that the French army was at Charleroi. If he had
immediately despatched an aide-de-camp to Brussels, he would have
arrived there at six in the evening; and yet the Duke of Wellington was
not informed that the French army was at Charleroi until eleven at
night. He thus lost five hours, in a crisis, and against a man, that
rendered the loss of a single hour highly important.

“3dly.—The infantry, cavalry, and artillery of that army were in
cantonments, so remote from each other that the infantry was engaged at
Waterloo without cavalry or artillery, which exposed it to considerable
loss, since it was obliged to form in close columns to make head against
the charges of the cuirassiers, under the fire of fifty pieces of
cannon. These brave men were slaughtered without cavalry to protect or
artillery to avenge them. As the three branches of an army cannot, for
an instant, dispense with each other’s assistance, they should be always
cantoned and placed in such a way as to be able to assist each other.

“4th.—The English General, although surprised, assigned Quatre-Bras,
which had been, for the last four-and-twenty hours in possession of the
French, as the rallying point of his army. He exposed his troops to
partial defeats as they gradually arrived; the danger which they
incurred was still more considerable, since they came without artillery
and without cavalry; he delivered up his infantry to his enemy
piece-meal, and destitute of the assistance of the two other branches.
He should have fixed upon Waterloo for his point of junction; he would
then have had the day of the 16th, and the night between the 16th and
17th, an interval quite sufficient, to collect the whole of his army,
infantry, cavalry, and artillery. The French could not have arrived
until the 17th, and would have found all his troops in position.

_Eighth Observation._—“1st, The English General gave battle at Waterloo
on the 18th; that measure was contrary to the interests of his nation,
to the general system of war adopted by the Allies, and to all the rules
of war. It was not the interest of England, who wants so many men to
recruit her armies in India, in her American colonies, and in her vast
establishments, to expose herself, with a generous vivacity, to a
sanguinary contest in which she might lose the only army she had, and
expend, at the very least, her best blood. The plan of the Allies
consisted in operating in a mass and in avoiding all partial actions.
Nothing was more contrary to their interests and their plan than to
expose the success of their cause in a doubtful battle with a nearly
equal force, in which all the probabilities were against them. If the
Anglo-Dutch army had been destroyed at Waterloo, of what use to the
allies would have been the great number of armies that were preparing to
cross the Rhine, the Alps, and the Pyrenees?

“2ndly.—The English General, in accepting the battle of Waterloo, placed
his reliance on the co-operation of the Prussians, but that co-operation
could not be carried into effect until the afternoon; he therefore
continued exposed alone from four o’clock in the morning until five in
the afternoon, that is to say, for thirteen hours; no battle lasts
generally more than six hours; that co-operation was therefore an
illusion.

“But, if he relied upon the co-operation of the Prussians, he must have
supposed that the whole of the French army was opposed to him, and he
must consequently have undertaken to defend his field of battle, during
thirteen hours, with 90,000 men of different nations, against an army of
104,000 French. That calculation was evidently false; he could not have
maintained himself three hours; the battle would have been decided by
eight o’clock in the morning, and the Prussians would have arrived only
to be taken in flank. Both armies would have been destroyed in one
battle. If he calculated that a part of the French army had, conformably
to the rules of war, pursued the Prussian army, he ought, in that case,
to have been convinced that he could receive no assistance from it, and
that the Prussians, beaten at Ligny, having lost from 25 to 30,000 men
on the field of battle, having 20,000 scattered and dispersed over the
country, and pursued by from 35 to 40,000 victorious French, would not
have risked any fresh operation, and would have considered themselves
scarcely sufficient to maintain a defensive position. In that case, the
Anglo-Dutch army alone would have had to sustain the shock of 69,000
French during the whole of the 18th, and there is no Englishman who will
not admit that the result of that struggle could not have been doubtful,
and that their army was not so constituted as to be capable of
sustaining the attack of the imperial army for four hours.

“During the whole of the night between the 17th and 18th, the weather
was horrible, and the roads were impassable until nine o’clock in the
morning. This loss of six hours from day-break, was entirely in the
enemy’s favour; but could the English General stake the fate of such a
struggle upon the weather which happened in the night between the 17th
and 18th? Marshal Grouchy, with 34,000 men and 180 pieces of cannon,
found out the secret, which one would suppose was not to be found out,
of not being in the engagement of the 18th, either on the field of
battle of Mont St. Jean or of Wavres. But, had that Marshal pledged
himself to the English General to be led astray in so strange a manner?
The conduct of Marshal Grouchy was as unexpected as that his army
should, on its march, be swallowed up by an earthquake. Let us
recapitulate. If Marshal Grouchy had been on the field of battle of Mont
St. Jean, as he was supposed to be by the English General and the
Prussian General, during the whole night between the 17th and 18th, and
all the morning of the 18th, and the weather had allowed the French army
to be drawn up in order of battle at four o’clock in the morning, the
Anglo-Dutch army would have been dispersed and cut in pieces before
seven; its ruin would have been complete, and if the weather had not
allowed the French army to range itself in order of battle until ten,
the fate of the Anglo-Dutch army would have been decided before one
o’clock; the remains of it would have been driven either beyond the
forest or in the direction of Hal, and there would have been quite time
enough in the afternoon to go and meet Marshal Blucher, and treat him in
a similar manner. If Marshal Grouchy had encamped in front of Wavres in
the night between the 17th and 18th, no detachment could have been sent
by the Prussians to save the English army, which must have been
completely beaten by the 69,000 French opposed to it.

“3dly.—The position of Mont St. Jean was ill chosen. The first requisite
of a field of battle is to be without defiles in its rear. The English
General derived no advantage, during the battle, from his numerous
cavalry; he did not think that he ought to be and would be attacked on
the left; he believed that the attack would be made on his right.
Notwithstanding the diversion operated in his favour by General Bulow’s
30,000 Prussians, he would have twice effected his retreat, during the
battle, had that measure been possible. Thus, in reality, how strange
and capricious are human events! the bad choice of his field of battle,
which prevented all possibility of retreat, was the cause of his
success!!!

_Ninth Observation._—“It may be asked, what then should have been the
conduct of the English General, after the battle of Ligny and the
engagement of Quatre Bras? On this point posterity will not entertain
two opinions: he ought, in the night between the 17th and 18th, to have
crossed the forest of Soignes, by the road of Charleroi; the Prussian
army ought also to have crossed it by the road of Wavres; the armies
would have effected a junction by break of day in Brussels; left their
rearguards for the defence of the forest, gained some days in order to
give time to the Prussians, dispersed after the battle of Ligny, to join
their army; reinforced themselves with fourteen English regiments, which
were in garrison in the fortresses of Belgium, or had been just landed
at Ostend, on their return from America, and let the Emperor of the
French manœuvre as he pleased.

“Would he, with an army of 100,000 men have traversed the forest of
Soignes to attack in an open country the two united armies, consisting
of more than 200,000 men, and in position? It would have certainly been
the most advantageous thing that could have happened to the allies.
Would he have been content with taking up a position himself? He could
not have long remained in an inactive state, since 300,000 Russians,
Austrians, Bavarians, &c. were on their march to the Rhine; they would
have been in a few weeks on the Marne, which would have compelled him to
hasten to the assistance of his capital. It was then that the
Anglo-Prussian army ought to have marched and effected its junction with
the Allies, under the walls of Paris. It would have exposed itself to no
risk, suffered no loss, and have acted conformably to the interests of
the English nation, and the general plan of carrying on the war adopted
by the Allies, and sanctioned by the rules of the military art. From the
15th to the 18th, the Duke of Wellington invariably manœuvred as his
enemy wished; he executed nothing which the latter apprehended he would.
The English infantry was firm and solid; the cavalry might have
conducted itself better: the Anglo-Dutch army was twice saved, in the
course of the day, by the Prussians—the first time before three o’clock,
by the arrival of General Bulow with 30,000 men, and the second time by
the arrival of Marshal Blucher with 31,000 men. In that battle, 69,000
French beat 120,000 men; the victory was wrested from them, between
eight and nine, by 150,000 men.

“Let the feelings of the people of London be imagined, if they had been
doomed to hear of the destruction of their army, and the prodigal waste
of their best blood, in support of the cause of kings against that of
nations, of privileges against equality, of the oligarchs against the
liberals, and of the principles of the Holy Alliance against those of
the sovereignty of the people!!!”

               PLAN FOR A POLITICAL DEFENCE OF NAPOLEON;
                          SKETCHED BY HIMSELF.

Tuesday, August 27th.—About four o’clock I joined the Emperor in the
garden: he had been engaged in dictating during the whole of the
morning. The wind was very rough, and the Emperor declined riding out in
the calash: he therefore walked about for a considerable time in the
great alley through the wood, attended by all the persons of his suite.
He jokingly teased one of the party, by observing that he was sulky, and
accusing him of being very often discontented and ill-humoured, &c.

The Emperor, on rising from the dinner table, adverted to his recent
protest against the treaty of the 2d of August. He expatiated with
warmth on the subject, and remarked, while he walked rapidly about the
apartment, that he intended to draw up another protest, on a more
extensive and important scale, against the Bill that had been passed in
the British Parliament. He would prove, he said, that the Bill was not a
law, but a violation of every existing law. Napoleon was proscribed, and
not judged by it. The English Parliament had done, not what was just,
but what was deemed to be expedient; it had imitated Themistocles,
without hearing Aristides. The Emperor then arraigned himself before all
the nations in Europe, and proved that each would successively acquit
him. He took a review of the different acts of his reign, and justified
them all.

“The French and the Italians,” said he, “lament my absence; I carry with
me the gratitude of the Poles, and even the late and bitter regrets of
the Spaniards. Europe will soon deplore the loss of the equilibrium, to
the maintenance of which my French empire was absolutely necessary. The
Continent is now in the most perilous situation, being continually
exposed to the risk of being overrun by Cossacks and Tartars. And the
English,” said he in conclusion, “the English will deplore their victory
at Waterloo! Things will be carried to such a length that posterity,
together with every well-informed and well-disposed person among our
contemporaries, will regret that I did not succeed in all my
enterprises.”

In course of his remarks, the Emperor occasionally rose to a pitch of
sublimity. I shall not follow him into all his details. He promised to
dictate the observations he had made, and said that he had already
sketched out a plan for his political defence, in fourteen paragraphs.

CATINAT; TURENNE; CONDÉ.—QUESTIONS RESPECTING THE GREATEST BATTLE FOUGHT
  BY THE EMPEROR; THE BEST TROOPS, &C.

28th.—The Emperor did not go out until four o’clock; he had spent three
hours in the bath. The weather was very unpleasant, and in consequence
he merely took a few turns in the garden. He had just written to inform
the Governor that henceforth he would receive no strangers, unless they
were admitted to Longwood by passes from the Grand Marshal, as in the
time of Admiral Cockburn.

The Emperor proposed playing a game at chess; but, before he sat down to
do so, he took up a volume of Fenelon. It was _La Direction de
Conscience d’un Roi_. He read to us several articles, criticising them
with considerable spirit and gaiety. At length he threw down the volume,
saying that the name of an author had never influenced him in forming an
opinion of his writings; that he always judged of works according to the
sentiments with which they inspired him; being always equally willing to
praise or to censure. He added that, in spite of the name of Fenelon, he
had no hesitation in declaring that the work he had just looked through
was a mere string of rhapsodies; and truly it would be difficult to
refute this assertion.

After dinner, the Emperor conversed about the old marine establishment,
and alluded to M. de Grasse, and his defeat on the 12th of April. He
wished to learn some particulars on this subject; and he asked for the
Dictionary of Sieges and Battles. He looked over it, and it afforded him
matter for a multitude of observations. Catinat came under his
consideration, and the remarks he made on that commander lowered him
infinitely in our estimation. Napoleon said that he thought him very
inferior to the reputation he enjoyed, after viewing the scenes of his
operations in Italy, and reading his correspondence with Louvois.
“Having risen from the _tiers-état_,” said he, “and being educated for
the law, distinguished for urbanity of manners and moral integrity,
affecting the practice of equality, residing at St. Gratien, at the
gates of Paris, Catinat became the favourite of the _literati_ of the
capital and the philosophers of the day, who exalted him beyond his real
merits. He was in no way comparable to Vendôme.”

The Emperor said, that he had endeavoured, in the same manner, to study
the characters of Turenne and Condé, suspecting that they were also the
objects of exaggerated eulogy; but that he was convinced those two men
were fully entitled to all the commendation that has been bestowed on
them. With regard to Turenne, he remarked that his intrepidity encreased
in proportion as he acquired experience; as he grew old, he evinced
greater courage than he seemed to possess in early life. The contrary
was observable in Condé, who displayed so much dauntless valour at the
commencement of his career.

Now that I am alluding to Turenne, Condé, and other distinguished men, I
may mention, as a curious fact, that I never, by any chance, heard
Napoleon utter the name of Frederick the Great. Yet many circumstances
prove that Frederick held a high rank in Napoleon’s regard. The large
silver watch, a kind of alarum used by that Prince, which hangs by the
fire-place in the Emperor’s apartment at St. Helena;—the eagerness with
which Napoleon, on his entrance into Potzdam, seized the sword of the
Prussian hero, exclaiming, “Let those who will seek other spoil; I value
this beyond millions!”—finally, his long and silent contemplation of the
tomb of Frederick—sufficiently attest the deep interest which Napoleon
attached to every thing connected with that sovereign.[12]

Footnote 12:

  After my removal from Longwood, Napoleon undertook a special work on
  Frederick the Great, with notes and Commentaries on his Campaigns.

In the Dictionary of Sieges and Battles, which the Emperor was looking
over to-day, he found his name mentioned in every page; but connected
with anecdotes either totally false, or at least misstated. This led him
to exclaim against the whole swarm of inferior writers, and their
unworthy abuse of the pen. “Literature,” he said, “had become the food
of the vulgar, while it ought to have been reserved exclusively for
people of refined taste.

“For example,” said the Emperor, “it is affirmed that, when at Arcole, I
one night took the post of a sentinel who had fallen asleep. This idea
was doubtless conceived by a citizen, by a lawyer, perhaps, but
certainly not by a soldier. The author evidently wishes to represent me
in a favourable point of view; and he of course imagined that nothing
could reflect greater credit on me than the story he has invented. He
certainly wrote it with the view of doing me honour; but he knew not
that I was totally incapable of the action he describes. I was much too
fatigued for any such thing; and it is very probable that I should
myself have fallen asleep before the sentinel.”

We then enumerated about fifty or sixty great battles that had been
fought by the Emperor. Some one present having asked which was the
greatest, the Emperor replied that it was difficult to answer that
question, since it was first necessary to enquire what was meant by the
greatest battle. “Mine,” continued he, “cannot be judged of separately.
They had no unity of place, action or design. They formed merely a
portion of extensive plans. They can therefore only be judged of by
their results. The battle of Marengo, which was so long undecided,
procured for us the dominion of all Italy; Ulm annihilated a whole army;
Jena threw the whole Prussian monarchy into our hands; Friedland opened
to us the Russian empire; and Eckmühl decided the fate of a war. The
battle of Moscow was one in which the greatest talent was displayed, and
in which the fewest results were obtained. Waterloo, where every thing
failed, would, had every thing succeeded, have saved France and
re-established Europe.”

Madame de Montholon having asked what troops might be accounted the
best, “Those who gain victories, Madam,” replied the Emperor. “But,”
added he, “soldiers are capricious and inconstant, like you ladies. The
best troops were the Carthagenians under Hannibal; the Romans under the
Scipios; the Macedonians under Alexander; and the Prussians under
Frederick.” He thought, however, he might safely affirm that the French
troops were, of all others, those who could most easily be rendered the
best, and preserved so.

“With my complete guard of 40 or 50,000 men, I would have pledged myself
to march through all Europe. It may, perhaps, be possible to produce
troops as good as those who composed my army of Italy and Austerlitz;
but certainly nothing can ever surpass them.”

The Emperor, who had dwelt for a considerable time on this subject,
which was so interesting to him, suddenly recollecting himself, asked
what it was o’clock. He was informed that it was eleven.—“Well,” said
he, rising, “we at least have the merit of having got through our
evening without the help of either tragedy or comedy.”

MADAME DE COTTIN’S MATHILDE, &C.—ALL FRENCHMEN INTERESTED IN
  NAPOLEON.—DESAIX AND NAPOLEON AT MARENGO.—SIR SIDNEY SMITH.—CAUSE OF
  GENERAL BONAPARTE’S RETURN TO FRANCE.—ACCOUNT OF HIS VOYAGE.—INSTANCES
  OF THE CAPRICE OF FORTUNE.

29th. About two o’clock the Emperor desired me to attend him in his
chamber, and he gave me some private orders. At four I rejoined him. I
found him sitting under the tent, surrounded by all his suite; he was
swinging backward and forward on his chair, laughing, talking, and
making every effort to be cheerful, while, at the same time, he
continually repeated that he felt dull and languid. He rose and took a
drive in the calash.

After dinner, the conversation turned on romance writing. Some one
mentioned Madame Cottin’s Mathilde, the scene of which is laid in Syria.
The Emperor asked the person who had alluded to the work whether he had
ever seen Madame Cottin, whether she liked him (Napoleon), whether her
work was favourable to him, &c., but as he did not receive a ready
answer he thus continued: “But every body has loved me and hated me:
every one has been for me and against me by turns. I may truly say that
there is not a single Frenchman in whom I have not excited interest. All
must have loved me, from Collot d’Herbois (had he lived) to the Prince
of Condé; only not all at the same time but at different intervals and
periods. I was like the sun which crosses the equator to travel through
the ecliptic. According as my influence was felt in each different
climate, all hopes expanded, and I was blessed and adored; but when I
had departed, when I was no longer understood, unfavourable sentiments
arose.”

Egypt next became the subject of conversation; and the Emperor again
sketched the characters of Kleber and Desaix. The latter joined the
First Consul on the eve of the battle of Marengo. Napoleon asked him how
he could have thought of signing the capitulation of Egypt; since the
army was sufficiently numerous to maintain possession of it. “We ought
not to have lost Egypt,” he observed.—“That’s very true,” replied
Desaix, “and the army was certainly numerous enough to enable us to
retain possession of the country. But the General-in-chief left us; and
at that distance from home, the General-in-chief is not a single man in
the army; he is the half, the three-fourths, the five-sixths of it. I
had no alternative but to resign the possession of the country. I doubt
whether I could have succeeded had I acted otherwise; besides, it would
have been criminal to make the attempt, for in such a case it is a
soldier’s duty to obey, and I did so.”

Desaix, immediately after his arrival at Marengo, obtained the command
of the reserve. Towards the end of the battle, and amidst the greatest
apparent disorder, Napoleon came up to him:—“Well,” said Desaix,
“affairs are going on very badly, the battle is lost. I can only secure
the retreat. Is it not so?”—“Quite the contrary,” said the First Consul;
“to me the result of the battle was never for a moment doubtful. Those
masses, which you see in disorder on the right and left, are marching to
form in your rear. The battle is gained. Order your column to advance:
you have but to reap the glory of the victory.”

The Emperor afterwards spoke of Sir Sidney Smith, He had, he said, just
read in the Moniteur the documents relating to the convention of
El-Arish, in which he remarked that Sir Sidney had evinced a great share
of intelligence and integrity. The Emperor said he bewildered Kleber by
the stories which he made him believe. But when Sir Sidney received
intelligence of the refusal of the English Government to ratify the
treaty, he was very much dissatisfied, and behaved very honourably to
the French army. “After all,” said the Emperor, “Sir Sidney Smith is not
a bad man. I now entertain a better opinion of him than I did;
particularly after what I daily witness in the conduct of his
confederates.”

It was Sir Sidney Smith who, by communicating the European journals to
Napoleon, brought about the departure of the General-in-chief, and
consequently the dénouement of Brumaire. The French, on their return
from St. Jean d’Acre, were totally ignorant of all that had taken place
in Europe for several months. Napoleon, eager to obtain intelligence,
sent a flag of truce on board the Turkish admiral’s ship, under the
pretence of treating for the ransom of the prisoners whom he had taken
at Aboukir, not doubting that the envoy would be stopped by Sir Sidney
Smith, who carefully prevented all direct communication between the
French and the Turks. Accordingly, the French flag of truce received
directions from Sir Sidney to go on board his ship. He experienced the
handsomest treatment; and the English commander, having among other
things ascertained that the disasters of Italy were quite unknown to
Napoleon, he indulged in the malicious pleasure of sending him a file of
newspapers.

Napoleon spent the whole night in his tent, perusing the papers; and he
came to the determination of immediately proceeding to Europe, to repair
the disasters of France, and, if possible, to save her from destruction.

Admiral Ganthaume, who brought Napoleon from Egypt in Le Murion frigate,
frequently related to me the details of his voyage. The Admiral remained
at head-quarters after the destruction of the fleet at Aboukir. Shortly
after the return from Syria, and immediately after a communication with
the English squadron, the General-in-chief sent for him and directed him
to proceed forthwith to Alexandria, to fit out secretly, and with all
possible speed, one of the Venetian frigates that were lying off that
port, and to let him know when the vessel was ready to sail.

These orders were executed. The General-in-chief, who was making a tour
of inspection, proceeded to an unfrequented part of the coast, with a
party of his guides. Boats were in readiness to receive them, and they
were conveyed to the frigate without passing through Alexandria.

The frigate weighed that very evening, in order to get out of sight of
the English cruisers and the fleet that was anchored at Aboukir, before
daylight. Unfortunately, a calm ensued while the vessel was still within
sight of the coast, and from the tops the English ships at Aboukir were
still discernible.

The utmost alarm prevailed on board the frigate. It was proposed to
return to Alexandria; but Napoleon opposed this suggestion. The die was
cast; and happily they soon got beyond the reach of observation.

The voyage was very long and very unfavourable. The idea of being
overtaken by the English frequently occasioned alarm. Though no one knew
the intentions of the General, each formed his own conjectures, and the
utmost anxiety prevailed. Napoleon alone was calm and undisturbed.
During the greater part of the day he used to shut himself up in his
cabin, where, as Ganthaume informed me, he employed himself in reading
sometimes the Bible, and sometimes the Koran. Whenever he appeared on
deck, he displayed the utmost cheerfulness and ease, and conversed on
the most indifferent subjects.

General Menou was the last person to whom Napoleon spoke on shore. He
said to him, “My dear General, you must take care of yourselves here. If
I have the happiness to reach France, the reign of ranting shall he at
an end.”

On a perusal of the papers furnished by Sir Sidney Smith, Napoleon
formed such an idea of the disasters of France that he concluded the
enemy had crossed the Alps, and was already in possession of several of
our Southern Departments. When therefore the frigate approached the
coast of Europe, Napoleon directed the Admiral to make for Collioure and
Port-Vendre, situated at the extremity of the Gulf of Lyons. A gale of
wind drove them upon the coast of Corsica. They then entered Ajaccio,
where they obtained intelligence of the state of affairs in France.

Ganthaume informed me that he saw, at Ajaccio, the house which was
occupied by Napoleon’s family, the patrimonial abode. The arrival of
their celebrated countryman immediately set all the inhabitants of the
island in motion. A crowd of cousins came to welcome him, and the
streets were thronged with people.

Napoleon again set sail, and the frigate now steered towards Marseilles
and Toulon. However, just as they were on the point of reaching the
place of their destination, a new source of alarm arose. At sunset, on
the larboard of the frigate, and precisely in the sun’s rays, they
observed thirty sail making towards them with the wind aft. Ganthaume
proposed that the long boat of the frigate should be manned with the
best sailors, and that the General should get on board, and under favour
of the night, endeavour to gain the shore. But Napoleon declined this
proposition, observing that there would always be time enough for that
mode of escape; and he directed the captain to continue his course as
though nothing had occurred. Meanwhile, night set in, and the enemy’s
signal-guns were heard, at a distance, and right astern: thus it
appeared that the frigate had not been observed. Next day they anchored
at Frejus. The rest is well known.

The Emperor concluded the evening’s conversation, by relating to us
three curious instances of the caprice of fortune, which took place in
the same quarter of the world, and about the same period.

A corporal, who deserted from one of the regiments of the army of Egypt,
joined the Mamelukes, and was made a Bey. After his elevation, he wrote
a letter to his former General.

A fat sutler’s wife who had followed the French army, became the
favourite of the Pasha of Jerusalem. She could not write, but she sent a
messenger with her compliments to her old friends, assuring them that
she would never forget her country, but would always afford protection
to the French and the Christians. “She was,” said the Emperor, “the
Zaire of the day.”

A young peasant-girl of Cape Corso, being seized in a fishing-boat by
corsairs, was conveyed to Barbary, and subsequently became the ruling
favourite of the King of Morocco. The Emperor, after some diplomatic
communications, caused the brother of this young girl to be brought from
Corsica to Paris, and, after having him suitably fitted out, sent him to
his sister; but he never heard of them afterwards.

It was late when the Emperor retired to rest; he had spent upwards of
three hours in conversation.

30th.—I attended the Emperor at four o’clock. He had been engaged in
dictating under the tent. The Governor had returned answers to the
letters which M. de Montholon addressed to him by the Emperor’s orders.

To the first communication, containing the protest against the treaty of
the 2d of August, and various other complaints, no answer was returned,
except that the Governor wished to be informed what letter he had kept
back. This we could not tell him, since we had not seen the letters. We
had asked _him_ that question; and he was the only person capable of
answering it.

To the second letter, which stated that the Emperor would not receive
strangers at Longwood unless they were admitted by the Grand Marshal’s
passes, as was usual in the time of Admiral Cockburn, the Governor
replied that he had been sorry to see General Bonaparte troubled by
intrusive visitors at Longwood, and that he wished to prevent such
importunity for the future. This was a most revolting piece of irony,
considering the situation in which the Emperor was placed, and the tenor
of M. de Montholon’s letter.

After dinner the Emperor retired to the drawing-room, and desired us all
to seat ourselves round the table, to form, as he said, an academic
sitting. He began to dictate to us on some subjects; but when the parts
that had been written were read over to him, he resolved to cancel them.
Conversation was then resumed, and was kept up for a considerable time,
partly in a serious and partly in a lively strain. It was near one
o’clock when the Emperor retired. For some time past we have sat up
later than we used to do. This is a good sign: the Emperor feels better,
and he is more cheerful and talkative than he lately was.

HISTORICAL DOUBTS.—THE REGENCY OF THE DUKE OF ORLEANS.—MADAME DE
  MAINTENON.—HER MARRIAGE WITH LOUIS XIV.

31st.—The Emperor rose very early, and took a turn round the park alone.
On his return, not wishing to have any one disturbed, he desired my son,
who had risen, to sit down under the tent, and write from his dictation:
in this manner he employed himself for two hours. We all breakfasted
with him.

We took an airing in the calash. The conversation turned on the doubts
that were attached to various points of history. The Emperor made some
very curious remarks on this subject, and concluded with a circumstance
relating to the Regent. “If,” said he, “Louis XV. had died in his
childhood, and nothing was more possible, who would have doubted that
the Duke of Orleans had poisoned the whole royal family? Who would have
ventured to defend him? Had not one child survived, that Prince would
not have had justice done him.” The Emperor then alluded to the
character of the Duke of Orleans, and particularly to his errors in the
affair of the legitimate princes. “There he degraded himself,” said
Napoleon; “not to say, however, that their cause was good. Louis XIV.
usurped a right in nominating them to the succession. On the extinction
of the Royal House, the choice of a Sovereign is unquestionably the
prerogative of the nation. The act of Louis XIV. was doubtless an error
into which that Monarch was betrayed by his own greatness. He conceived
that every thing emanating from him must necessarily be great. Yet he
seemed to entertain a suspicion that the world might not be exactly of
his opinion; for he took precautions to consolidate his work by giving
his natural children in marriage to the legitimate princes and
princesses of the royal family. As to the Regency, it is very certain
that it devolved by right on the Duke of Orleans. Louis XIV.’s will was
a downright absurdity: it was a violation of our fundamental laws.
France was a monarchy, and he gave us a republic for a Regency.”

The Emperor then mentioned Madame de Maintenon, whose career, he said,
was most extraordinary. She was, he observed, the Bianca Capello[13] of
her age; but less romantic, and not quite so amusing. Pursuing his
historical doubts, he said a great deal on the subject of Madame de
Maintenon’s marriage with Louis XIV. He declared that he was sometimes
inclined to regard the circumstance as very problematical, in spite of
all that was said about it in the Memoirs of the time.

Footnote 13:

  A noble Venetian lady of great beauty, whose adventures form a truly
  romantic and dramatic history. She eloped from her father’s house to
  follow a young Florentine pedlar, and was reduced to the greatest
  wretchedness. She subsequently became Grand Duchess of Tuscany, and
  she closed her career by coolly poisoning herself at table, in a fit
  of vexation at seeing the Grand Duke, her husband, partake of a
  poisoned dish, which she had prepared for her brother-in-law, Cardinal
  de Medicis, who, on his part, obstinately abstained from tasting it.

“The fact is,” observed he, “that there does not, and never did, exist
any official and authentic proof of the marriage. What could be Louis
XIV.’s object in keeping the measure so strictly secret, both from his
contemporaries and posterity? and how happened it that the Noailles
family, to whom Madame de Maintenon was related, suffered nothing to
transpire on the subject? This was the more singular considering that
Madame de Maintenon survived Louis XIV.”

The Emperor, feeling somewhat fatigued this evening, retired to rest
early. He seemed indisposed and low spirited.

          THE FRENCH MINISTERS, &C.—ANECDOTE OF M. DARU.—FADED
                         FINERY AT ST. HELENA.

Sunday, September 1st.—The Emperor went out about three o’clock: he said
that he had felt feeble, languid, and dull the whole of the day. We all
felt indisposed in the same way: it was the effect of the weather. We
strolled out to the great path in the wood, while the calash was
preparing; but no sooner had we reached the extremity of the path than a
shower of rain came on. It was so heavy that the Emperor was obliged to
take refuge at the foot of a gum-tree, the scanty foliage of which,
however, afforded but little shelter. The calash soon arrived to take us
up; and we were returning home with all speed, when we perceived the
Governor, at some distance, making towards us. The Emperor immediately
ordered the coachman to turn, observing, that of two evils he would
choose the least; and we took a circuitous route homewards, in spite of
the wind and rain. We, however, escaped Sir Hudson Lowe: that was an
advantage.

Before dinner, the Emperor, in his chamber, took a review of the
individuals who had been attached to his Household, the Council of
State, and the different ministerial departments. Alluding to M. Daru,
he observed that he was a man distinguished for probity and for
indefatigable application to business. At the retreat from Moscow, M.
Daru’s firmness and presence of mind were remarkable, and the Emperor
often afterwards said that he laboured like an ox, while he displayed
the courage of a lion.

Business seemed to be M. Daru’s element; he was incessantly occupied.
Soon after he was appointed Secretary of State, one of his friends was
expressing a fear that the immense business in which he would
thenceforth be absorbed might prove too much for him. “On the contrary,”
replied Daru, “I assure you that, since I have entered upon my new
functions, I seem to have absolutely nothing to do.” On one occasion
only was his vigour ever known to relax. The Emperor called him up,
after midnight, to write from his dictation: M. Daru was so completely
overcome by fatigue that he scarcely knew what he was writing; at length
he could hold out no longer, and he fell asleep over his paper. After
enjoying a sound nap, he awoke, and, to his astonishment, perceived the
Emperor by his side quietly engaged in writing. The shortness of the
candles informed him that his slumber had been of considerable duration.
While he sat for a few moments overwhelmed with confusion, his eyes met
those of the Emperor, who said to him: “Well, Sir, you see I have been
doing your work, since you would not do it yourself. I suppose you have
eaten a hearty supper, and passed a pleasant evening; but business must
not be neglected.”—“I pass a pleasant evening, Sire!” said M. Daru. “I
have been for several nights without sleep, and closely engaged. Of this
your Majesty now sees the consequence, and I am exceedingly sorry for
it.”—“Why did you not inform me of this?” said the Emperor, “I do not
want to kill you. Go to bed. Good night, M. Daru.” This was certainly a
characteristic trait, and one that was well calculated to remove the
false notions which were generally entertained respecting Napoleon’s
harshness of temper. But I know not by what fatality facts of this kind
were concealed from our knowledge, while any absurd inventions
unfavourable to the Emperor were so actively circulated. Was it because
the courtiers reserved their flattery for the interior of the palace,
and sought to create a sort of counterpoise, by assuming elsewhere an
air of opposition and independence? Be this as it may, had any
individual related traits of the above kind in the saloons of Paris, he
would probably have been told that he had invented them, or would have
been looked upon as a fool for giving credit to them.

The Grand Marshal and his lady came to dine at Longwood, which they were
accustomed to do every Sunday.

During dinner, the Emperor jokingly alluded to the faded finery of the
ladies. He said that their dresses would soon resemble the gay trappings
of those old misers who purchase their wardrobes from the dealers in
second-hand clothes; they no longer displayed the freshness and elegance
that characterized the millinery of Leroi, Despeaux, Herbault, &c. The
ladies craved indulgence for St. Helena; and their husbands reminded the
Emperor of his fastidiousness with regard to female dress at the
Tuileries, which, it was remarked, had proved the ruin of some families.
At this the Emperor laughed, and said that the idea of his scrupulous
taste in dress was a mere invention of the ladies of the Court, who made
it a pretence, or an excuse, for their extravagance. The conversation
then turned on our splendour at St. Helena. The Emperor said that he had
told Marchand he would wear every day the hunting-coat which he then had
on, until it was completely worn out: it was already very far gone.

Both before and after dinner the Emperor played a few games at chess: he
felt low-spirited and nervous, and retired to bed early.

THE CAMPAIGN OF SAXONY IN 1813.—REFLECTIONS.—ANALYSIS.—BATTLES| OF
  LUTZEN AND WURTZEN.—NEGOTIATIONS.—BATTLES| OF DRESDEN, LEIPSIC,
  HANAU,| &c.

Sept. 2.—To-day there was some horse-racing at the camp, at which one of
the Emperor’s suite was present.

The Emperor did not go out until late, and he walked to the calash. The
wind blew very hard, and he renounced his intention of taking a drive.
He sat down beneath the tent: but, finding it not very pleasant without
doors, he retired to his library, where he took up the Letters of Madame
de Chateauroux, looked through the Expedition to Bohemia, and analysed
the Life of Marshal de Belle-Isle. He again went out to take a walk in
the garden; but he returned almost immediately, and directed me to
follow him.

He took up a book relating to our last campaigns, and, after perusing it
for some time, he threw it down, saying, “It is a downright rhapsody—a
mere tissue of contradictions and absurdities.” He conversed for a
considerable time on the two celebrated campaigns of Saxony: his
observations were principally moral, and few or none military; I noted
down the following as the most remarkable: “That memorable campaign,”
said he, “will be regarded as the triumph of courage in the youth of
France; of intrigue and cunning in English diplomacy; of intelligence on
the part of the Russians; and of effrontery in the Austrian Cabinet. It
will mark the period of the disorganization of political societies, the
great separation of subjects from their Sovereigns; finally, the decay
of the first military virtues—fidelity, loyalty, and honour. In vain
people may write and comment, invent falsehoods and suppositions; to
this odious and mortifying result we must all come at last: time will
develop both its truth and its consequences.

“But it is a remarkable circumstance, in this case, that all discredit
is equally removed from sovereigns, soldiers, and people. It was
entirely the work of a few military intriguers and headlong politicians,
who, under the specious pretext of shaking off the foreign yoke and
recovering the national independence, purposely sold their own rulers to
envious rival Cabinets. The results soon became manifest: the King of
Saxony lost half his dominions, and the King of Bavaria was compelled to
make valuable restitutions. What did the traitors care for that? They
enjoyed their rewards and their wealth, and those who had proved
themselves most upright and innocent were visited with the severest
punishment. The King of Saxony, the most honest man who ever wielded a
sceptre, was stripped of half his territories; and the King of Denmark,
so faithful to all his engagements, was deprived of a crown! This,
however, was affirmed to be the restoration and the triumph of
morality!... Such is the distributive justice of this world!...

“To the honour of human nature, and even to the honour of Kings, I must
once more declare that never was more virtue manifested than amidst the
baseness which marked this period. I never for a moment had cause to
complain individually of the Princes our allies. The good King of Saxony
continued faithful to the last; the King of Bavaria loyally avowed to me
that he was no longer his own master; the generosity of the King of
Würtemburg was particularly remarkable; the Prince of Baden yielded only
to force, and in the very last extremity. All, I must render them this
justice, gave me due notice of the storm that was gathering, in order
that I might take the necessary precautions. But, on the other hand, how
odious was the conduct of subaltern agents! Military history will never
obliterate the infamy of the Saxons, who returned to our ranks for the
purpose of destroying us! Their treachery became proverbial among the
troops, who still use the term _Saxonner_ to designate the act of a
soldier who assassinates another. To crown all, it was a Frenchman, a
man for whom French blood purchased a crown, a nursling of France, who
gave the finishing stroke to our disasters! Gracious God!

“But in the situation in which I was placed, the circumstance which
served to fill up the measure of my distress was that I beheld the
decisive hour gradually approach. The star paled; I felt the reins slip
from my hands, and yet I could do nothing. Only a sudden turn of fortune
could save us: to treat, to conclude any compact, would have been to
yield like a fool to the enemy. I was convinced of this, and the event
sufficiently proved that I was not mistaken. We had, therefore, no
alternative but to fight; and every day, by some fatality or other, our
chances diminished. Treason began to penetrate into our ranks. Great
numbers of our troops sunk under the effects of fatigue and
discouragement. My lieutenants became dispirited, and, consequently,
unfortunate. They were no longer the same men who figured at the
commencement of the Revolution, or who had distinguished themselves in
the brilliant moments of my success. I have been informed that some
presumed to allege, in their defence, that at first they fought for the
Republic and for their country; while afterwards they fought only for a
single man, for his individual interests, and his ambition.

“Base subterfuge! Ask the young and brave soldiers, and the officers of
intermediate rank in the French army, whether such a calculation ever
entered their thoughts;—whether they ever saw before them any thing but
the enemy, or behind them any thing save the honour, glory, and triumph
of France! These men never fought better than at the period alluded to.
Why dissemble? Why not make a candid avowal? The truth is that,
generally speaking, the officers of high rank had gained every object of
their ambition. They were sated with wealth and honours. They had drunk
of the cup of pleasure, and they henceforth wished for repose, which
they would have purchased at any price. The sacred flame was
extinguished; they were willing to sink to the level of Louis XV.’s
marshals.”

If the words above quoted require any comment—if the sense here, or in
other similar passages of my Journal, should be found to be incomplete,
I must not be held responsible. I have literally noted down what
Napoleon uttered, and I am accountable for nothing more. I have already
several times mentioned that, when the Emperor spoke, I never ventured
to interrupt him by questions or remarks. On the subject of the
celebrated campaign of 1813, I may mention that, from various detached
conversations of Napoleon, which I have not noted down at the time when
they occurred, he was far from being deceived as to the crisis which
threatened France, and he correctly estimated the full extent of the
risk by which he was surrounded in the opening of the campaign. Ever
since his return from Moscow, he had seen the danger, he said, and
endeavoured to avert it. From that moment he resolved on making the
greatest sacrifices; but the choice of the proper moment for proclaiming
these sacrifices was the difficult point, and that which chiefly
occupied his consideration. If the influence of material power be great,
he said, the power of opinion is still greater; it is magical in its
effects. His object was to preserve it; and a false step, a word
inadvertently uttered, might for ever have destroyed the illusion. He
found it indispensable to exert the greatest circumspection, and to
manifest the utmost apparent confidence in his own strength. It was,
above all, necessary to look forward to the future.

His great fault, his fundamental error, was in supposing that his
adversaries always had as much judgment and knowledge of their own
interests, as he himself possessed. From the first, he said, he
suspected that Austria would avail herself of the difficulties in which
he was placed, in order to secure great advantages to herself; but he
never could have believed that the Monarch was so blind, or his advisers
so treacherous as to wish to bring about his (Napoleon’s) downfall, and
thereby leave their own country henceforth at the mercy of the
uncontrolled power of Russia. The Emperor pursued the same train of
reasoning with regard to the Confederation of the Rhine, which, he
admitted, might, perhaps, have cause to be dissatisfied with him; but
which, he concluded, must dread still more the idea of falling under the
power of Austria and Prussia. Napoleon conceived that the same arguments
were not inapplicable to Prussia; which, he presumed, could not wish
entirely to destroy a counterpoise, that was necessary to her
independence, and her very existence. Napoleon made full allowance for
the hatred of his enemies, and for the dissatisfaction and malevolence
which, perhaps, existed among his allies; but he could not suppose that
either wished for his destruction, since he felt himself to be so
necessary to all; and he acted accordingly. Such was Napoleon’s ruling
idea throughout the whole of this important period. It was the key of
his whole conduct to the very last hour, and even to the moment of his
fall. It must be carefully borne in mind, for it serves to explain many
things, perhaps, all;—his hostile attitude, his haughty language, his
refusal to treat, his determination to fight, &c.

If he should be successful, he thought he could then make honourable
sacrifices, and a glorious peace; while the illusion of his superiority
would remain undiminished. If, on the contrary, he should experience
reverses, it would still be time enough to make concessions; and he
concluded that the interest of the Austrians and all true Germans must
secure him the support of their arms or of their diplomacy; for he
supposed they were convinced, as he himself was, that his power had
henceforth become indispensable to the structure, repose, security, and
existence of Europe. But that of which he had reason to doubt proved
most prosperous: victory continued faithful to him; his first successes
were admirable, and almost incredible. On the other hand, that which he
believed to be infallible was precisely what failed him:—his natural
allies betrayed him, and hastened his downfall.

In support of what I have just alleged, and with the view of throwing
light on the Emperor’s remarks above quoted, I shall here insert a brief
recapitulation of the events of that fatal campaign. In France, at the
time, we were made acquainted only with its results; the bulletins gave
us but little information, and we received no foreign publications.
Besides, the period is now distant, and so many important events have
since occurred to occupy public attention, that these details may be
partly forgotten by those who once knew them. They are here arranged in
chronological order.

I extract this recapitulation from a work written by M. de Montveran,
which was published in 1820. The author has bestowed great care on the
collection of official and authentic documents; and he has availed
himself of the information furnished by preceding writers. I am,
therefore, of opinion, that this work is, unquestionably, the best that
has been written on the subject. M. de Montveran is far from being
favourable to Napoleon; however, it is but just to admit that he
maintains a tone of impartiality which does credit to his character,
while, at the same time, it enhances the merit of his work.

“On the 2nd of May, Napoleon opened the campaign of Saxony by the
victory of Lützen, a most surprising event, and one which reflects
immortal honour on the conquerors. A newly embodied army, without
cavalry, marched to face the veteran bands of Russia and Prussia; but
the genius of the Chief, and the valour of the young troops whom he
commanded, made amends for all. The French had no cavalry; but bodies of
infantry advanced in squares, flanked by an immense mass of artillery,
presenting the appearance of so many moving fortresses. Eighty-four
thousand infantry, consisting of French troops, or troops of the
Confederation, with only 4,000 cavalry, beat 107,000 Russians or
Prussians with more than 20,000 cavalry. Alexander and the King of
Prussia witnessed the conflict in person. Their celebrated guards could
not maintain their ground against our young conscripts. The enemy lost
18,000 men; our loss amounted to 12,000, and our want of cavalry
prevented us from reaping the usual fruit of our conquests. However, the
moral result of the victory was immense. The enthusiasm of our troops
resumed its ascendency, and the Emperor recovered the full influence of
opinion. The Allies retreated before him without venturing the chances
of another battle.[14]

Footnote 14:

  At the victory of Lützen the Emperor sustained a severe loss in the
  death of the brave and loyal Marshal Bessières, Duke of Istria, who
  was so sincerely devoted to Napoleon. The King of Saxony raised a
  monument to his memory on the very spot where he received his
  death-blow. By a glorious coincidence the monument is similar to that
  of Gustavus Adolphus, and is placed not far distant from it. It
  consists of a simple stone surrounded by poplars. This is not the only
  instance in which foreigners have rendered that homage to the memory
  of brave Frenchmen, which their own countrymen have neglected.

“On the 9th, Napoleon entered Dresden as a conqueror, conducting back to
his capital the King of Saxony, who, from the consciousness of his own
interests, as well as the wish to remain faithful to his engagements,
had retired on the approach of the Allies, whose proposals he had
constantly rejected.

“On the 21st and 22d, Napoleon again triumphed at Würtzen and Bautzen.
The Allies had chosen their ground, which the brilliant campaigns of
Frederick had rendered classic. They had intrenched themselves, and they
thought their position impregnable: but every thing yielded to the grand
views and well-conducted plans of the French general who, at the very
commencement of the conflict, declared himself to be certain of the
victory.

“The Allies lost 18,000 or 20,000 men. They were unable to retain their
position, and they retired in disorder. The Emperor pursued them. He had
already passed through Lusatia, crossed Silesia, and reached the Oder,
when the Allies demanded an armistice to treat for peace; and Napoleon,
thinking the favourable moment had arrived, granted it.

“On the 4th of June, the armistice of Pleissvitz was concluded. This
event had the most decisive influence in producing our misfortunes; it
was the fatal knot to which were attached all the chances and destinies
of the campaign.

“Should the Emperor have granted this armistice, or have followed up his
advantages? This was, at the moment, a problem which time, and the
events that have proved so fatal to us, solved when too late. The
Emperor, crowned with victory, halted before his fallen enemies, to whom
he could now make concessions without compromising his dignity; his
sacrifices could be regarded only as moderation. Austria, hitherto
uncertain as to what course she should pursue, struck with our success,
rejoined us. Napoleon now reasonably hoped to see the ratification of a
peace which he wished for, and he would not let slip so favourable an
opportunity, to run the risk of a check that might have lost all, and
which was the more likely to take place since his army had marched
forward in haste and in the utmost disorder, and his rear was uncovered
and harassed by the enemy. He conceived that the armistice, at all
events, afforded him an opportunity of concentrating and organizing his
forces, and opening his communications with France, by which means he
should be enabled to receive immense reinforcements, and to create a
corps of cavalry.”

Unfortunately, in spite of all the Emperor’s calculations, this fatal
armistice proved advantageous only to our enemies: it was maintained for
nearly three months, and it served only to bring about their triumph and
our destruction. Austria, who was still our ally, by a deception, which
history will justly characterize, availed herself of that title to
oppose us with the greater advantage. Requiring delay, she obtained it.
The Russians, who were waiting for reinforcements, received them; the
Prussians doubled their numbers; the English subsidies arrived, and the
Swedish army rejoined. Secret associations were set on foot; a general
insurrection of the whole German population was excited; while, at the
same time, the defection of the Cabinets of the Rhenish Confederation,
and the corruption of the Allied officers, were effected. Treason also
began to creep into the superior ranks. General Jomini, the Chief of the
Staff of one of our army corps, went over to the enemy with all the
information he had been able to collect respecting the plans of the
campaign, &c.[15]

Footnote 15:

  A reference to Count Montholon’s Memoirs of Napoleon will shew that
  the Emperor admits the falsehood of this charge against Jomini, who he
  says was not even acquainted with his plans.

The result sufficiently proved to the Emperor all the errors of the
armistice, and convinced him that he would have done better had he
persisted in pressing forward; for had he continued successful, the
Allies, alarmed at finding themselves deprived of the aid of Austria,
with whom they could no longer have maintained intelligence, cut off
from the Prince of Sweden, who would have remained behind, seeing
blockades of the fortresses of the Oder raised, and the war carried back
to Poland, to the gates of Dantzick, amidst a people ready to rise in a
mass—the Allies, I say, would infallibly have treated. If, on the other
hand, we had sustained a reverse, the consequences could not have been
more fatal than those which were actually experienced. The judicious
calculations of the Emperor ruined him: that which seemed to be
indiscretion and temerity would probably have saved him.

                CONGRESS OF PRAGUE ON THE 29TH OF JULY.—

“After two months of difficulties and obstacles, the Congress opened
under the mediation of Austria; if, indeed, the term Congress can be
properly applied to an assembly in which no deliberations took place,
and where one party had determined beforehand that none should be held.

“The mediator and the adversaries were equally our enemies; all
concurred in their hostility to us, and they had already decided on war.
Why then did they wait? Because Austria still possessed a shade of
modesty, and she wished, in the debates, to gain a pretence for
declaring war against us. Prussia and Russia, on their part, thought it
necessary to preserve their credit in Europe by this false manifestation
of their desire and their efforts to preserve peace. All were merely
affixing the seal to their Machiavelian system.

“For them the real Congress was not the assembly at Prague; it had
already taken place two months before. Time has since thrown into our
hands the authentic records of the intrigues, machinations, and even
treaties, in which they were engaged during that interval. It is now
evident that the armistice was resorted to by pretended friends and
avowed enemies, only for the sake of artfully cementing the union that
was to effect the overthrow of Napoleon, and creating the triumvirate
destined to oppress Europe while it pretended to deliver her.

“Austria had, from interested motives, long delayed the opening of the
Congress of Prague. Resolved to repair her losses at any price, she did
not hesitate to sacrifice her honour, the better to ensure her success.
She masked her perfidy under the disguise of friendship. Declaring
herself our ally, and eagerly complimenting us on every new triumph, she
insisted, with an air of the warmest interest, on being our mediatrix
when she had already entered into an agreement to make common cause with
our enemies. Her propositions were accepted. But she wished to gain time
for her preparations; and thus every day fresh obstacles were started,
while the utmost tardiness was evinced in settling them.

“Austria at first offered her services as a mediatrix; but, changing her
tone in proportion as her warlike preparations advanced, she soon
signified her wish to become an arbitress, at the same time intimating
that she expected great advantages in return for the services she might
render. At length, after an armistice of two months, when Austria
thought herself perfectly prepared, and when every thing was agreed upon
among the coalesced powers, they opened the Congress, not to treat of
peace and to establish amicable relations, but to develop their real
sentiments, and to insult us unreservedly. The Russians, in particular,
behaved with unusual ill grace. They were no longer the Russians who
anxiously solicited an armistice after the routs of Lützen, Würtzen, and
Bautzen. They now looked upon themselves as the dictators of Europe,
which, indeed, they have since really become, by the spirit of their
diplomacy, the blindness of their allies, their geographical situation,
and finally by the force of things. But whom did Alexander select as his
minister to this Congress? Precisely one who, by personal circumstances,
was, according to the laws of France, unqualified for such a post;—one
who was by birth a Frenchman. Certainly it would have been difficult to
offer a more personal and direct insult. Napoleon felt it; but he
concealed his resentment.

“Under such circumstances much could not be expected from the Congress:
during the few days of its sitting, our enemies merely drew up a series
of notes more or less acrimonious, while the conduct of Austria was
marked by the most odious partiality.

“On the 10th of August, only two days after the first meeting of the
negotiators, the Russians and Prussians haughtily withdrew; and on the
12th, Austria, that faithful ally, that obsequious and devoted friend,
who had shewn herself so eager to become our mediatrix and arbitress,
suddenly laid aside those titles to declare war against us, allowing no
interval save that required for the signature of the manifesto, which
she had been for two months secretly concerting with her new allies, and
which will ever remain a record of her shame and degradation, since it
acknowledges the sacrifice of an Archduchess to the necessity of
crouching before a detested ally. History will decide on these acts.
However, to the honour of the throne and of morality, there is reason to
believe that most of these transactions, and in particular the real
course of affairs, was unknown to the Emperor Francis, who is reputed to
be the most gentle, upright, moral, and pious of princes. It has been
affirmed that many of these acts were determined on without his
knowledge, and that others were represented to him under a totally false
colouring. The whole of these disgraceful proceedings must be attributed
to British gold, to the craftiness of Russian diplomacy, and to the
passions of the Austrian aristocracy, excited by the English faction
which at that time ruled Europe.

“The Congress broke up with mutual feelings of irritation. The Emperor
then expressed his sentiments in official and public documents, in the
most forcible language, and in a tone of the highest superiority. But
this he did with the view of creating a favourable impression on the
public mind; for he remained so far master of himself as that, though
hastening to take up arms, he nevertheless demanded a renewal of the
negotiations, which were resumed at Prague. He deemed it advisable not
to lose the advantages of constant communications: Austria would be
easily detached if we obtained advantages, and she would be easily
convinced if we sustained reverses. Such was the Congress of Prague.

“It will perhaps be asked whether Napoleon was duped by this Congress
and the circumstances arising out of it. The answer is that he was not,
or at least not entirely. If he had not a knowledge of every fact, he
was never for a moment mistaken as to the intentions and sentiments that
were really entertained.

“Napoleon, from the moment of his first victory at Lutzen, had
authentically proposed a general congress. This he conceived to be the
only means of treating for a general peace, insuring the independence of
France, and the guarantee of the modern system. Every other mode of
negotiation appeared to him merely a lure; and if he seemed to depart
from this principle, in accepting the mediation of Austria, and agreeing
to the conferences at Prague, it was because, as time advanced, affairs
became more complicated. The defeat of Vittoria, the evacuation of
Spain, and the spirit of the French people, which was declining, had
considerably diminished his prosperity. He anticipated the result of the
negotiations: but he wished to gain time, in his turn, and to await the
course of events. He was not deceived as to the part which Austria would
act; and, without knowing precisely how far she would carry her
deception, he could well discern, from her mysterious conduct and
delays, what was likely to be her determination. At Dresden, he had even
had personal conversations with the first negotiator of the Austrian
government, who had sufficiently indicated the line of conduct he
intended to pursue. The Emperor having remarked that he had, after all,
eight hundred thousand men to oppose the enemy, the negotiator eagerly
added, ‘Your Majesty may say twelve hundred thousand; for you may, if
you please, join our force to your own.’ But what was to be the price of
this advantage? Nothing less than the restitution of Illyria, the
cession of the Duchy of Warsaw, the frontier of the Inn, &c. ‘And after
all,’ said the Emperor, ‘what should I have gained by this? Had we made
all these concessions, should we not have been humbling ourselves for
nothing, and furnishing Austria with the means of making farther
demands, and afterwards opposing us with greater advantage?’ He never
relinquished the idea that the true interests of Austria being closely
connected with our danger, we should be more certain of regaining her by
our misfortunes than of securing her by our concessions. Napoleon was
therefore deaf to every demand; but he had so little doubt of the
engagements which Austria had already contracted with our enemies that
he is described as having said, half good-humouredly and half
indignantly, to the Austrian negotiator: ‘Come now, confess: tell me how
much they have paid you for this.’”

How severely did Napoleon suffer on this occasion! What trials of
patience did he not undergo! And yet he was accused at the time of not
wishing for peace! “How was I perplexed,” said he, “when conversing on
this subject, to find myself the only one to judge of the extent of our
danger and to adopt means to avert it. I was harassed on the one hand by
the coalesced Powers, who threatened our very existence, and on the
other by the spirit of my own subjects, who in their blindness, seemed
to make common cause with them; by our enemies, who were labouring for
my destruction, and by the importunities of my people and even my
Ministers, who urged me to throw myself on the mercy of foreigners. And
I was obliged to keep up a bold look in this embarrassing situation: to
reply haughtily to some, and sharply to rebuff others, who created
difficulties in my rear, encouraged the mistaken course of public
opinion, instead of seeking to give it a proper direction, and suffered
me to be tormented by demands for peace, when they ought to have proved
that the only means of obtaining it was to urge me ostensibly to war.

“However, my determination was fixed. I awaited the result of events,
firmly resolved to enter into no concessions or treaties which could
present only a temporary reparation, and would inevitably have been
attended by fatal consequences. Any middle course must have been
dangerous; there was no safety except in victory, which would have
preserved my power, or in some catastrophe, which would have brought
back my allies.”

I beg to call the reader’s attention to this last idea, which I have
already noticed on a former occasion. It will perhaps be thought I
attach great importance to it; but this is because I feel the necessity
of rendering it intelligible. Though I now enter into it completely, yet
it was long before I understood it, and it appeared to me paradoxical
and subtle.

“In what a situation was I placed!” continued the Emperor. “I saw that
France, her destinies, her principles, depended on me alone!”—“Sire!” I
ventured to observe, “this was the opinion generally entertained; and
yet some parties reproached you for it, exclaiming, with bitterness, Why
would he connect every thing with himself personally?”—“That was a
vulgar accusation,” resumed the Emperor warmly. “My situation was not
one of my own choosing, nor did it arise out of any fault of mine; it
was produced entirely by the nature and force of circumstances—by the
conflict of two opposite orders of things. Would the individuals who
held this language, if indeed they were sincere, have preferred to go
back to the period preceding Brumaire, when our internal dissolution was
complete, foreign invasion certain, and the destruction of France
inevitable? From the moment when we decided on the concentration of
power, which could alone save us; when we determined on the unity of
doctrines and resources which rendered us a mighty nation, the destinies
of France depended solely on the character, the measures, and the
principles of him whom she had invested with this accidental
dictatorship: from that moment the public welfare, _the State_, _was
myself_. These words, which I addressed to men who were capable of
understanding them, were strongly censured by the narrow-minded and
ill-disposed; but the enemy felt the full force of them, and, therefore,
his first object was to effect my overthrow. The same outcry was raised
against other words which I uttered in the sincerity of my heart: when I
said that _France had more need of me than I of her_. This profound
truth was declared to be merely excess of vanity. But, my dear Las
Cases, you now see that I can relinquish every thing; and as to what I
endure here, my sufferings cannot be long. My life is limited; but the
existence of France...!” Then, resuming his former idea, he said: “The
circumstances in which we were placed were extraordinary and
unprecedented; it would be vain to seek for any parallel to them. I was
myself the keystone of an edifice totally new, and raised on a slight
foundation! Its stability depended on each of my battles! Had I been
conquered at Marengo, France would have encountered all the disasters of
1814 and 1815, without those prodigies of glory which succeeded, and
which will be immortal. It was the same at Austerlitz and Jena, and
again at Eylau and elsewhere. The vulgar failed not to blame my ambition
as the cause of all these wars. But they were not of my choosing; they
were produced by the nature and force of events; they arose out of that
conflict between the past and the future—that constant and permanent
coalition of our enemies, which obliged us to subdue under pain of being
subdued.”

But to return to the negotiations of 1813. On a reference to the
documents and manifestoes published at the time by the two parties,
whether because we can now peruse them with more impartiality, or
because our eyes have been opened by the conduct of those who triumphed,
it is impossible to avoid feeling astonished at the two-fold error which
led the Germans to rise so furiously against him from whose yoke they
pretended to free themselves, and in favour of those whom they expected
to become their regenerators!

_Renewal of Hostilities—Battle of Dresden—26th and 27th of August._—“The
hostile powers again presented themselves on the field of battle. The
French, with a force of 300,000, of which 40,000 were cavalry, occupied
the heart of Saxony, on the left bank of the Elbe; and the Allies, with
500,000 men, of whom 100,000 were cavalry, threatened them in three
different directions, from Berlin, Silesia, and Bohemia, on Dresden.
This prodigious disproportion of numbers had no effect on Napoleon: he
concentrated his forces, and boldly assumed the offensive. Having
fortified the line of the Elbe, which had now become his _point
d’appui_, and, protecting his extreme right by the mountains of Bohemia,
he directed one of his masses on Berlin against Bernadotte, who
commanded an army of Prussians and Swedes, while another marched upon
Silesia, against Blucher, who commanded a corps composed of Prussians
and Russians, and a third was stationed at Dresden, as the key of the
position, to observe the great Austrian and Russian army in Bohemia.
Finally, a fourth mass was placed as a reserve, at Zittau, with the
threefold object:—1st, to penetrate into Bohemia, in case we should gain
advantages over Blucher; 2d, to keep the great body of the allied force
confined in Bohemia, through the fear of being attacked on their rear,
should they attempt to debouch by the banks of the Elbe; 3d, to assist,
if necessary, in assailing Blucher, or in the defence of Dresden; in
case that city should be attacked.

“The Emperor, who had already made a rapid movement against Blucher,
kept him in action before him, when he was suddenly called away for the
defence of Dresden, where 65,000 French troops found themselves opposed
to 180,000 of the allied forces. Prince Schwartzenberg, the
General-in-chief, had on the 26th made a faint attack upon Dresden,
instead of making a precipitate and decided assault; which, it was
affirmed, was the intention of the deserter Jomini, who so well
understood the real state of things. Napoleon came up with the rapidity
of lightning and he combined a force of 100,000 French troops to oppose
the 180,000 Allies. The affair was not for a moment doubtful; and to his
sagacity and penetration the whole success must be attributed. The enemy
was overwhelmed: he lost 40,000 men, and was for some time threatened
with total destruction. The Emperor Alexander was present at the battle,
and Moreau was killed by one of the first balls fired by our imperial
guard, only a short time after he had spoken with the Russian
Emperor.[16]

Footnote 16:

  The death of the celebrated Moreau, while fighting under the Russian
  banner, and opposed to a French army, was and will ever continue to be
  a source of affliction to his sincerest friends and warmest partizans.

The happy chance, so anxiously looked for by Napoleon, which was
expected to re-establish our affairs, to procure peace, and to save
France, had at length arrived. Accordingly, on the ensuing day, Austria
despatched an agent to the Emperor with amicable propositions. But such
is the uncertainty of human destiny! From that moment, by an unexampled
fatality, Napoleon had to encounter a chain of disasters. At every
point, except that at which he was himself present, we sustained
reverses. Our army in Silesia lost 25,000 men in opposing Blucher; the
force which attacked Berlin was defeated by the Prince of Sweden with
great loss; and finally, nearly the whole of Vandamme’s corps, which,
after the victory of Dresden, was sent into Bohemia with the view of
assailing the enemy’s rear and accomplishing his destruction, being
abandoned to itself and to the temerity of its chief, was cut in pieces
by that part of the Allied army which was precipitately falling back.
This fatal disaster and the safety of the Austrians, were owing to a
sudden indisposition of Napoleon’s, who, at the moment, was supposed to
have been poisoned. His presence no longer excited the ardour of the
different corps in maintaining the pursuit; indecision and dejection
ensued; Vandamme’s force was destroyed, and all the fruit of the
splendid victory of Dresden was lost!

After these repeated checks, the spell was broken; the spirit of the
French troops became depressed, while that of the Allies was the more
highly excited. The hostile forces were now to be estimated only by
their numerical value; and a catastrophe seemed to be at hand. Napoleon,
in despair, made vain efforts; he hastened to every threatened point,
and was immediately called away by some new disaster. Wherever he
appeared, the Allies retreated before him; and they advanced again as
soon as his back was turned. Meanwhile, all the enemy’s masses were
constantly gaining ground; they had effected communications with each
other, and they now formed a semicircle, which was gradually closing
round the French, who were driven back upon the Elbe, and threatened
completely to surround them. On the other hand, our rear, which was
uncovered, was assailed by detached parties. The kingdom of Westphalia
was in open insurrection; our convoys were intercepted, and we could no
longer maintain free communications with France.

It was in this state of things that the negotiators of Prague submitted
to the Emperor the result of their new conferences. In addition to
numerous restitutions required from Napoleon and his allies, two
propositions were made: 1st, the surrender of all the influence and
acquisitions of France in Italy; 2nd, the resignation of the French
influence and acquisitions in Germany. Napoleon was to take his choice
of one of these two divisions of power; but the other was to be
consigned to the Allies, to be entirely at their disposal, without any
interference on his part. Neither friends nor enemies entertained a
doubt that Napoleon would eagerly accept these proposals. “For,” said
those about him, “if you choose Italy, you remain at the gates of
Vienna, and the Allies will soon dispute among themselves respecting the
division of Germany. If, on the contrary, you prefer the surrender of
Italy, you will thereby secure the friendship of Austria, to whose share
it will fall, and you will remain in the heart of Germany. In either
case you will soon re-appear in the character of a mediator, or a
ruler.” Napoleon, however, was not of this opinion: he rejected the
propositions, and persisted in following up his own ideas.

Certainly, said he to himself, such proposals in themselves, and in the
natural course of things, are most acceptable; but where is the
guarantee of their sincerity? He saw plainly that the Allies were only
endeavouring to lure him into the snare. They determined thenceforth to
abide neither by faith nor law. They did not conceive themselves bound
by any law of nations, or any rule of integrity in their conduct towards
us. In opposition to the suggestions of his counsellors, Napoleon said;
“If I relinquish Germany, Austria will but contend the more
perseveringly until she obtains Italy. If, on the other hand, I
surrender Italy to her, she will, in order to secure the possession of
it, endeavour to expel me from Germany. Thus, one concession granted
will only serve as an inducement for seeking or enforcing new ones. The
first stone of the edifice being removed, the downfall of the whole will
inevitably ensue. I shall be urged on from one concession to another,
until I am driven back to the Tuileries, whence the French people,
enraged at my weakness, and blaming me for their disasters, will
doubtless banish me, and perhaps justly, though they may themselves
immediately become the prey of foreigners.”

May not this be regarded as a literal prediction of the events which
succeeded the insidious declaration of Frankfort, the propositions of
Chatillon, &c.?

“It would be a thousand times better to perish in battle amidst the fury
of the enemy’s triumph,” continued the Emperor; “for even defeats leave
behind them the respect due to adversity, when they are attended by
magnanimous perseverance. I therefore prefer to give battle; for, if I
should be conquered, we still have with us the true political interests
of the majority of our enemies. But, if I should be victorious, I may
save all. I have still chances in my favour—I am far from despairing.”

_Intended movement on Berlin._—“In this state of things, the King of
Bavaria, the chief of the Confederation of the Rhine, wrote to the
Emperor, assuring him, confidentially, that he would continue his
alliance for six weeks longer. “This was long enough,” said Napoleon,
“to render it very probable that he would no longer find it necessary to
abandon us.” He determined immediately to attempt a great movement,
which he had long contemplated, and which plainly indicates the
resources of his enterprising mind. Pressed upon the Elbe, the right
bank of which was already lined by the great mass of the Allied force,
and nearly turned on his rear, he conceived the bold idea of changing
positions with the enemy, place for place; to penetrate the enemy’s
line, to form in his rear, and compel him to pass in his turn, with his
whole force, to the left bank of the river. If, in this situation, he
abandoned his communications with France, he would have in his rear the
enemy’s territory, a tract of country not yet ravaged by war, and which
was capable of maintaining his troops, Berlin, Brandenburg, and
Mecklenburg, he would recover his fortresses, with their immense
garrisons, the separation and the loss of which would be a great fault
after a reverse of fortune, and would be regarded as resources of genius
in case of triumph. Napoleon now looked forward to new combinations, and
a new prospect of future success: he beheld before him only the errors,
the astonishment, and the stupor of his enemies, and the brilliancy of
his own enterprise and his hopes.

_Battles of Leipsic_, (16th, 18th, and 19th Oct.)—“At first fortune
seemed to smile on the Emperor. But soon a letter from the King of
Würtemberg informed him that the Bavarian army, seduced by the intrigues
and the prevailing spirit of the moment, had joined the Austrians,
against whom it was intended to be opposed; that it was marching on the
Rhine to cut off the communication with France; and that the King of
Würtemburg was himself under the necessity of yielding to circumstances.
This unexpected event obliged Napoleon to suspend his preparations, and
to fall back, in order to secure his retreat. This complication of false
movements proved servicable to the Allies, who pressed and surrounded
us: a great battle seemed inevitable. Napoleon assembled his forces in
the plains of Leipsic. His army consisted of 157,000 men, and six
hundred pieces of artillery; but the Allies possessed 1000 pieces of
artillery, and 350,000 men. During the first day, the action was
furiously maintained: The French remained triumphant and the victory
would have been decisive, if one of the corps stationed at Dresden had
taken part in the battle, as the Emperor hoped it would. General Merfeld
was taken prisoner, but liberated on parole, with an intimation that the
Emperor was at length willing to renounce Germany. But the Allies, who
were encouraged by the arrival of an immense reinforcement, resumed the
engagement on the following day; and they were now so numerous that,
when their troops were exhausted, they were regularly relieved by fresh
corps, as on the parade. The most inconceivable fatality was now
combined with inequality of numbers; the most infamous treachery
unexpectedly broke out in our ranks; the Saxons, our allies, deserted
us, went over to the enemy, and turned their artillery against us.
Still, however, the presence of mind, energy, and skill of the French
general, together with the courage of our troops, made amends for all,
and we again remained masters of the field.

“These two terrible engagements, which history will record as battles of
giants, had cost the enemy 150,000 of his best troops, 50,000 of whom
lay dead on the field of battle. Our loss amounted to 50,000 only. Thus
the difference between our forces was considerably diminished: and a
third engagement presented itself, with changes much more favourable.
But our ammunition was exhausted; our parks contained no more than
16,000 charges; we had fired 220,000 during the two preceding days. We
were compelled to make arrangements for our retreat, which commenced
during the night, on Leipsic. At day-break the Allies assailed us; they
entered Leipsic along with us, and an engagement commenced in the
streets of the city. Our rear-guard was defending itself valiantly and
without sustaining great loss, when a fatal occurrence ruined all: the
only bridge across the Elster, by which our retreat could be effected,
was, by some accident or misunderstanding, blown up. Thus all our forces
on the Leipsic bank of the river were lost, and all on the opposite bank
marched in haste and disorder upon Mentz. At Hanau we were compelled to
force a passage through 50,000 Bavarian troops. Only the wrecks of our
army returned to France; and, to render the misfortune complete, they
brought contagion along with them.”

Such was the fatal campaign of Saxony, our last national effort, the
tomb of our gigantic power. Opposed to the united efforts of all the
forces of Europe, and in spite of all the chances that were accumulated
against us, the genius of a single man had, in the course of this
campaign, been four times on the point of restoring our ascendancy, and
cementing it by peace: after the victories of Lützen and Bautzen, after
the battle of Dresden, at the time of the last movement on Berlin, and
finally on the plains of Leipsic.

Napoleon failed only by a complication of fatalities and perfidies, of
which history furnishes no example. I here note down only those which
occur to me on a retrospective view of the events of this period.

                              FATALITIES.

(A.) Sudden indisposition of Napoleon.

(B.) Unexpected overflow of the Bober.

(C.) Confidential letter from the King of Bavaria.

(D.) Orders which did not reach the corps at Dresden.

(E.) Deficiency of ammunition after the two battles of Leipsic.

(F.) Blowing up of the bridge across the Elster.

                               PERFIDIES.

(G.) Machinations and bad faith of Austria, the first and true cause of
our disasters.

(H.) Violation of the armistice of Pleisswitz, relative to our blockaded
fortresses.

(I.) Desertion of the chief of the staff of the 3d corps.

(K.) Defection of the Bavarian government.

(L.) Treachery of the Saxons.

(M.) Violation of the capitulation of Dresden, &c.

The following are a few lines of explanation:—

(A.) After the victory of Dresden, some one complimented Napoleon on his
great success. “Oh! this is nothing,” observed he, while his countenance
beamed with satisfaction; “Vandamme is in their rear, it is there that
we must look for the great result.” The Emperor was proceeding in person
to assist in accomplishing this decisive operation, when, unfortunately,
after one of his meals, he was seized with so violent a retching, that
he was supposed to have been poisoned, and it was found necessary to
convey him back to Dresden. Thus the operations were interrupted. The
fatal consequences that ensued are well known. How trivial was the
cause, and how calamitous were the results!

(B.) A sudden overflow of the Bober in Silesia was the principal cause
of the disasters of Marshal Macdonald. His corps, while in full
operation, were overtaken by the flood, which impeded their operations,
and caused the terrible losses which have been above described.

(C.) About the end of September, the King of Bavaria addressed a
confidential letter to Napoleon, stating that he would maintain his
alliance with him for six weeks or two months longer; and that during
that interval he would obstinately refuse every advantage that might be
held out to him. The Emperor, who was placed in a most critical
situation, and who, but for this circumstance, might, perhaps, have lent
an ear to the propositions that were made to him, now no longer
hesitated, but immediately determined on the bold movement which he had
contemplated on Berlin. He conceived that six weeks would be sufficient
to change the state of affairs, and to remove the fears of his allies.
Unfortunately, military intrigues proved more powerful than the wishes
of the King of Bavaria. Napoleon was forced to suspend his movement, and
to give battle at Leipsic with disadvantage. The consequences have
already been seen.

(D.) Napoleon, in making his arrangements for the battles of Leipsic,
had relied on a diversion of those corps of the army which he had left
in Dresden. Their co-operation might have rendered the victory decisive,
and have given a new turn to affairs. But, unfortunately the enemy’s
force was so numerous, and we were so completely surrounded, that the
Emperor’s orders could not be transmitted to Dresden.

(F.) After the two terrible engagements at Leipsic, the French were
effecting their retreat across the Elster by a single bridge. An officer
who was stationed to guard it was ordered to blow it up if the enemy
should present himself in pursuit of our rear-guard. Unluckily this
officer was, by some mistake or other, informed that the Emperor wanted
him. He immediately obeyed the summons, and in his absence a corporal of
sappers, at the first sight of some detached Russian corps, fired the
train and blew up the bridge, thus dooming to perdition that portion of
our force which still remained on the Leipsic bank of the river. The
whole of our rear-guard and baggage, two hundred pieces of artillery,
and thirty thousand prisoners (stragglers, wounded and sick), fell into
the hands of the enemy.

On the publication of the bulletins containing this intelligence, a
general outcry was raised by the discontented party in Paris. It was
asserted that the whole was a fabrication, and that the Emperor himself
had ordered the blowing up of the bridge, with a view to ensure his own
safety at the expense of the rest of the army. It was in vain to refer
to the statement of the officer, who confirmed the fact, while he
attempted to justify himself. This was declared to be another
fabrication or a piece of complaisance on the part of the officer. Such
was the language of the time.[17]

Footnote 17:

  When I visited London in 1814, public attention was occupied by the
  recent events of the Continent, and the battle of Leipsic was the
  general topic of conversation. It was related that, at the moment of
  the defeat, Napoleon’s presence of mind completely forsook him. He
  wandered about the city, and lost his way in a lonely street. Though
  on horseback, faintness obliged him to support himself against a wall,
  and in this situation he inquired his way of an old woman, and asked
  her for a glass of water. The blowing up of the bridge was not
  forgotten, and the story was related precisely as at Paris. These
  details, which were echoed in the drawing-rooms, and circulated about
  the streets, were credited among the higher ranks, as well as by the
  vulgar. Prints, representing the different events of the battle, were
  exhibited in the shop-windows. The subject of one of these engravings
  was the above described incident in the street of Leipsic. Such a
  multitude of absurdities was circulated that people of common sense
  had no resource but to shrug up their shoulders and patiently endure
  all that they heard.

(G.) The duplicity and bad faith of Austria, the numerous contradictions
between her acts and her professions, have already been mentioned.
Unmindful of the generosity of which she had been the object after the
battles of Leoben, Austerlitz, and Wagram, she discharged her debt of
gratitude according to the rules of policy, by eagerly seizing the
opportunity of repairing her losses at any price.

She ruined us by making us consent to the armistice of Pleisswitz; and
her conduct was the more odious, as she was determined to make war
against us; and a few days afterwards, though still our friend and ally,
and offering herself as a mediatrix, she entered into engagements
hostile to us. Her participation in the conventions of Rechembach about
the middle of June, and in the conferences of Trachenbergh, at the
commencement of July, is now well known. The necessity of maintaining a
certain appearance of decorum occasioned these matters to be kept a
secret for about a month after the commencement of hostilities. They
were at first proposed to Francis merely as eventual and precautionary
measures; and he was induced to affix his signature to them only by the
representations of his ministers, who described Napoleon as the scourge
of mankind, and attributed to him the delays in the opening of the
Congress, which in reality were occasioned by themselves. (_Montveran,_
vol. vi. p. 262.)

But, in spite of the conduct of Austria, Napoleon still cherished the
hope of seeing her resume her alliance with him; not that he could
calculate on any misunderstanding between her and the other coalesced
Powers, but because he supposed her to be sufficiently clear-sighted
with respect to her own interests. This idea never forsook him until the
moment of signing his abdication.[18]

Footnote 18:

  This supposition was not altogether ill-founded; for it still remains
  doubtful whether the consent of Austria to the dethronement of the
  Emperor was compulsory or voluntary. By one of those fatalities which
  attended the close of Napoleon’s career, a momentary success separated
  the Austrians and the Russians, and the order for marching upon Paris,
  as well as the famous declaration proscribing Napoleon and his family,
  proceeded solely from Alexander. When Francis presented himself, he
  had no alternative but to give his assent to measures which were
  already determined on; but many circumstances induce the belief that
  he did so with great repugnance and dissatisfaction.

(H.) The fortresses occupied by French troops in those places which were
in the possession of the Allied forces, were to have a clear circuit of
one league, and to receive supplies of provisions every five days; but
this article was not honestly fulfilled.

When the Armistice was prolonged, the French commissaries demanded that
officers of their army should be sent to the commanders of the
fortresses; but the Russian General-in-chief objected to this, and
circumstances were such that we were obliged to give up the point.
(_Montveran_, vol. vi. p. 270.)

(I.) The chief of the staff of the 3d corps, a Swiss by birth, but
educated in our ranks, went over to the enemy a few days before the
renewal of hostilities, taking with him all the information he could
collect. For this service the Emperor of Russia rewarded him with
particular favour and made him one of his Aides-de-camp. It has been
said that this officer, who was possessed of great talent, had reason to
complain of some injustice; but can any thing palliate such an act, or
remove the disgrace attending it?

(K.) Part of Napoleon’s plan of Campaign was that the Bavarian army,
stationed on the Danube, should act in concert with the army of Italy
stationed in Illyria, and that their combined efforts should be directed
upon Vienna. The important effect which these measures must have
produced on the fate of the Campaign may be easily conceived. But the
chief of the Bavarian army, under some pretence or other, but in reality
because he had entered into an understanding with the enemy, remained
constantly inactive, and thus paralyzed the efforts of the Viceroy, who
had to oppose the great bulk of the Austrian force. It has already been
stated that the open defection of the Bavarians, at the most critical
moment of the campaign, mainly contributed to bring about our disasters.

(L.) But nothing equalled the infamous and disgraceful treachery of the
Saxons, who, though they were then serving in our ranks and were our
companions in danger and glory, suddenly turned against us. Whatever
might be the fatal effects of their desertion, the disgrace attached to
themselves is greater than all the mischief they occasioned to us.

The conduct of Napoleon during this period, when he was described as a
monster of deception and bad faith, presents, on the contrary, an
example of singular magnanimity.

He had added a corps of Saxons to his Imperial guard; but, on the
desertion of their countrymen, he ranged them round their Sovereign,
whom he left at Leipsic,[19] releasing him from all his engagements.
There were also some Bavarians in his army, and he wrote to their chief,
informing him that, Bavaria having disloyally declared war against him,
this circumstance would authorize him in disarming and detaining
prisoners all the Bavarians in his service; but that such a measure
would destroy the confidence which Napoleon wished that the troops under
his orders should repose in him. He therefore ordered them to be
supplied with provisions, and dismissed.[20]

Footnote 19:

  The venerable and faithful King of Saxony followed his ally Napoleon,
  at whose head-quarters he established himself. The coalesced powers,
  on their entrance into Leipsic, seized the person of the King, and
  announced their design of disposing of his states. His misfortunes are
  known throughout Europe; they excited a deep interest in every
  generous heart.

Footnote 20:

  Amidst the general disloyalty, the conduct of the King of Würtemburg
  presents an honourable exception. That prince, though already at war
  with us, broke the brigade of cavalry, and the corps of infantry, who
  went over to the enemy, and at the same time withdrew the decoration
  of his Order from their officers.

(M.) I have before me the notes of a distinguished officer relative to
the capitulation of Dresden. Estimating the number of troops which we
had left behind us in the fortresses from which we were separated, he
concludes that they must have amounted altogether to 177,000. The
Emperor had but 157,000 men at Leipsic. How different, therefore, might
have been our fate, had those masses, or even a portion of them, been at
his disposal in this decisive event. But this unfortunate dispersion was
occasioned by extraordinary circumstances, and was not the result of any
regular system. The following particulars, relative to the violation of
the capitulation of Dresden, are literally quoted from the notes above
alluded to:—

“Above all, it is necessary to understand that it was determined in the
plan of the coalition against France, of which Prince Schwartzenberg had
the credit, that according as offers were made for the capitulation of
each of our numerous garrisons, the conditions should be fairly and
honourably granted, but without any intention of fulfilling them. This
point being established, the reason of the refusal of the capitulation,
signed at Dresden by Marshal St.-Cyr and Generals Tolstoy and Klenau,
was, that Prince Schwartzenberg could not ratify it, because the Count
de Lobau, Napoleon’s aide-de-camp, who was shut up in Dresden with the
Marshal, had protested against the capitulation. Some time after, the
capitulation of Dantzick, with General Rapp, was declined, under the
odiously false pretence that the garrison of Dresden, in spite of the
conditions of its capitulation, had entered into service immediately on
its arrival at Strasburg, and that, in consequence, the capitulation of
Dantzick could not be approved without incurring the risk of similar
inconveniences.

“The following is an additional proof of the bad faith of the Allies.
The garrison of Dresden, which was composed of two _corps d’armée_,
forming altogether 45,000 men, capitulated on the 11th of November.[21]

Footnote 21:

  The determination to surrender had been far from unanimous in the
  garrison. Opinions were divided on this point. Some were for returning
  to France by means of a capitulation, which course was adopted; others
  were in favour of an enterprise of a much bolder nature. This was
  nothing less than to quit Dresden, with the chosen troops of the
  garrison, to descend the Elbe by successively raising the blockade of
  Torgau, where there were 28,000 men; of Wittemberg, where there were
  5000; of Magdeburg, where there were 20,000, and to proceed to Hamburg
  where there were 32,000. The army thus collected together, which would
  have amounted to 60 or 80,000 men, was to repair to France, cutting a
  passage through the enemy’s ranks, or compelling him to retrograde by
  manœuvring on his rear; while the levies in mass that might have
  advanced to assail our veteran bands would have been paralyzed. And
  even had this plan failed, the issue was not likely to be more fatal
  than the capitulation. This opinion was warmly advocated by the Count
  de Lobau, Generals Teste, Mouton-Duvernet, and others. The design was
  grand, worthy of our glory, and quite in harmony with our past acts.
  It was the Emperor’s intention to carry it into effect, and for this
  purpose he issued orders, which, however, did not reach the place of
  their destination. The despair occasioned by the thought of
  surrendering was such that a portion of the troops urged the officer
  who was at the head of the opposing party to take the command upon
  himself. Respect for discipline at length prevailed over enthusiasm;
  but the officer above alluded to expressed himself in the most violent
  way in the council. It is said that, in his indignation, he exclaimed
  to the General-in-chief;—“The Emperor will tell me that, pistol in
  hand, I ought to have taken the command upon myself.“

“According to the terms of the capitulation, the French were to evacuate
the fortress in six columns and in six successive days, and to repair to
Strasburgh.

“This capitulation was fulfilled, so far at least as regarded our
evacuation of the fortress and its occupation by the enemy; but our
sixth column had scarcely made a day’s march from the town when it was
announced that the capitulation was declined and rejected by the
General-in-chief, Prince Schwartzenberg, by an order of the 19th of
November.

“When Marshal Saint-Cyr remonstrated against this conduct, it was
proposed, by way of compensation for the injustice, that he should be
permitted to re-enter Dresden with his troops, and be again placed in
possession of all the means of defence which he had before the
capitulation: this was merely a piece of irony.

“In vain did the Marshal negotiate for the literal fulfilment of the
articles agreed upon by Count Klenau, who had full powers for so doing;
the unfortunate garrison, broken up and dispersed, was under the
necessity of repairing to the different cantonments that were assigned
to it in Bohemia, instead of pursuing its march towards the Rhine.

“The Marshal, indignant at this flagrant breach of faith, despatched a
superior officer to communicate the circumstance to Napoleon; but the
Allies retarded his progress under various pretences, and he did not
reach Paris until the 18th of December. Subsequent events had by this
time rendered the evil past all remedy.”

After the series of deceptions and perfidies which I have here
disclosed, and which the Allies had established as a system, it is not
surprising that Napoleon should have placed no reliance on the famous
declaration of Frankfort, and that he should have felt indignant at the
blindness of our Legislative Body, the committee of which, either from
evil designs or mistaken views, completed the ruin of affairs. Napoleon
assured me that he was several times on the point of summoning the
members of this committee before him, in order to consult with them
confidentially and sincerely on the real state of things, and the
imminent danger with which we were threatened. Sometimes he thought that
he should undoubtedly bring them back to a right sense of their duty;
sometimes, on the contrary, he feared that obstinacy of opinion, or
mischievous intention, might have involved the affair in controversy,
which, considering the spirit of the moment, would have weakened our
resources and hastened our dissolution.

The Emperor frequently adverted to this critical point in the destinies
of France; but I have hitherto refrained from entering upon the detail
of a subject which presents nothing either agreeable or consolatory.

BENEVOLENT ACTIONS PERFORMED BY THE EMPEROR.—HIS VISIT TO
  AMSTERDAM.—OBSERVATIONS ON THE DUTCH, &C.—THE MASSACRES OF THE THIRD
  OF SEPTEMBER.—REMARKS ON REVOLUTIONS IN GENERAL.—UNHAPPY FATE OF LOUIS
  XVI.

3rd. About three o’clock, the Emperor sent for me to attend him in his
chamber. He had just finished dressing; and, as it was raining at the
time, he went into the drawing-room, where he communicated to me some
very curious particulars, which, as it may be supposed, concerned him,
and in which I played a conspicuous part.

Some time afterwards the Emperor took a turn on the lawn contiguous to
his library; but, finding the wind very violent, he soon returned to the
house and played at billiards, a thing which he very seldom thought of
doing.

In the course of the day, the Emperor related that, as he was once
travelling with the Empress, he stopped to breakfast in one of the
islands in the Rhine. There was a small farm house in the neighbourhood,
and while he was at breakfast he sent for the peasant to whom it
belonged, and desired him to ask boldly for whatever he thought would
render him happy; and, in order to inspire him with the greater
confidence, the Emperor made him drink several glasses of wine. The
peasant, who was more prudent and less limited in his choice than the
man described in the story of the three wishes, without hesitation
specified the object which he was ambitious to possess. The Emperor
commanded the prefect of the district immediately to provide him with
what he had made choice of, and the expense attending the gratification
of his wish did not exceed 6 or 7000 francs.

Napoleon added that, on another occasion, when he was sailing in a yacht
in Holland, he entered into conversation with the steersman, and asked
him how much his vessel was worth. “My vessel!” said the man, “it is not
mine; I should be too happy if it were, it would make my
fortune.”—“Well, then,” said the Emperor, “I make you a present of it;”
a favour for which the man seemed not particularly grateful. His
indifference was imputed to the phlegmatic temperament natural to his
countrymen; but this was not the case. “What benefit has he conferred on
me?” said he to one of his comrades who was congratulating him; “he has
spoken to me, and that is all; he has given me what was not his own to
give—a fine present truly!” In the mean time Duroc had purchased the
vessel of the owner, and the receipt was put into the hands of the
steersman, who, no longer doubting the reality of his good fortune,
indulged in the most extravagant demonstrations of joy. The expense of
this purchase was about the same as that attending the present made to
the countryman. “Thus,” said the Emperor, “it is evident that human
wishes are not so immoderate as they are generally supposed, and that it
is not so very difficult to render people happy! These two men
undoubtedly found themselves completely happy.”

When the Emperor visited Amsterdam, the people, he said, were very
hostile to him; but he soon completely ingratiated himself in the public
favour. He declined being attended by any other guard than the guard of
honour belonging to the city; and this mark of confidence immediately
gained him the esteem of the Dutch. He constantly appeared among every
class of citizens. On one occasion he addressed a crowd of people in the
following blunt manner:—“It is said that you are discontented—but why?
France has not conquered, but adopted, you: you are excluded from no
benefits which are enjoyed by the French; you are a portion of the same
family, and participate in all its advantages. Consider now: I have
selected my Prefects, Chamberlains, and Councillors of State from
amongst you in a just proportion to the amount of your population, and I
have augmented my guard with your Dutch guard. You complain of distress;
but, in this respect, France has still greater reason to be
dissatisfied. We all suffer, and we must continue to do so until the
common enemy, the tyrant of the sea, the vampire of your trade, shall be
brought to reason. You complain of the sacrifices you have made; but
come to France and see all that you still possess beyond what we do, and
then, perhaps, you will deem yourselves less unfortunate. Why not rather
congratulate yourselves on the circumstances that have brought about
your union with France. In the present state of Europe, what would you
be, if left to yourselves?—The slaves of all the world. Instead of
which, identified as you are with France, you will one day possess the
whole trade of the great Empire.” Then, assuming a tone of gaiety, he
said:—“I have done every thing in my power to please you. Have I not
sent you as a Governor precisely the man who suits you—the good and
pacific Lebrun. You condole with him, he condoles with you: you bewail
your distresses together. What more could I do for you?” At these words
the assembly burst into a loud fit of laughter. The Emperor had secured
the good graces of the multitude.—“However,” said he, “let us hope that
the present state of things will not last long. Believe me, I am as
anxious for a change as you can be. Every man of discernment among you
must be aware that it is neither my wish, nor for my interest, that
matters should remain as they now are.”

The Emperor left the people of Amsterdam full of enthusiasm for him; and
he, on his part, carried away impressions decidedly in their favour.
Previously to his journey he had often complained that whosoever he sent
to Holland immediately became a Dutchman. After his return, that
circumstance occurred to his recollection in the Council of State, and
he said that he had himself become a Dutchman. One day, when a member of
the Council spoke slightingly of the Dutch, the Emperor said,
“Gentlemen, you may be more agreeable than they; but I can wish you
nothing better than to be possessed of their moral qualities.”

After dinner, some one happened to mention the date of the day, the 3rd
of September; upon which the Emperor made some very remarkable
observations; among which were the following:—“This,” said he, “is the
anniversary of horrid and appalling executions, of a repetition, in
miniature, of Saint-Bartholomew’s day: less disgraceful, certainly,
because fewer victims were sacrificed, and because the atrocities were
not committed under the sanction of the Government, which, on the
contrary, used its endeavours to punish the crime. It was committed by
the mob of Paris; an unbridled power, which rivalled, and even
controlled, the Legislature.

“The atrocities of the 3rd of September were the result of fanaticism
rather than of absolute brutality: the authors of the massacres put to
death one of their own party, for having committed theft during the
executions. This dreadful event,” continued the Emperor, “arose out of
the force of circumstances and the spirit of the moment. No political
change ever takes place unattended by popular fury; the people are never
exposed to danger, without committing disorders and sacrificing victims.
The Prussians entered the French territory; and the people, before they
advanced to meet them, resolved to take revenge on their adherents in
Paris. Probably, this circumstance was not without its influence on the
safety of France. Who can doubt that if, during recent events, the
friends of the invaders had been the victims of similar horrors, France
would have fallen under the yoke of foreigners? But this could not have
happened, for we had become legitimate. The duration of authority, our
victories, our treaties, the re-establishment of our old manners, had
rendered our government regular. We could not plunge into the same
horrors as had been committed by the multitude; for my part, I neither
could nor would be a King of the mob.

“No social revolution ever takes place unaccompanied by violence. Every
revolution of this kind is at first merely a revolt. Time and success
alone can exalt and render it legitimate; but still it can never be
brought about without outrage. If people enjoying authority and fortune
are required to relinquish these advantages, they of course resist:
force is then resorted to; they are compelled to yield. In France this
point was gained by the lantern and public executions. The reign of
terror commenced on the 4th of August, with the abolition of titles of
nobility, tithes, and feudal rights, the wrecks of which were scattered
among the multitude, who then, for the first time, understood and felt
really interested in the Revolution. Before this period there was so
much of dependence and religious spirit among the people that many
doubted whether the crops would ripen as usual without the King and the
tithes.

“A revolution,” concluded the Emperor, “is one of the greatest evils by
which mankind can be visited. It is the scourge of the generation by
which it is brought about; and all the advantages it procures cannot
make amends for the misery with which it embitters the lives of those
who participate in it. It enriches the poor, who still remain
dissatisfied; and it impoverishes the rich, who cannot forget their
downfal. It subverts every thing; and, at its commencement, brings
misery to all and happiness to none.

“Beyond a doubt, true social happiness consists in the harmony and the
peaceful possession of the relative enjoyments of each class of people.
In regular and tranquil times, every individual has his share of
felicity: the cobbler in his stall is as content as the King on his
throne; the soldier is not less happy than the general. The best-founded
revolutions, at the outset, bring universal destruction in their train;
the advantages they may produce are reserved for a future age. Ours
seems to have been an irresistible fatality: it was a moral eruption,
which could no more be prevented than a physical eruption. When the
chemical combinations necessary to produce the latter are complete, it
bursts forth: in France the moral combinations which produce a
revolution had arrived at maturity, and the explosion accordingly took
place.”

We asked the Emperor whether he thought it would have been possible to
suppress the Revolution in its birth; and he replied that, if not
impossible, the attempt would at least have been difficult. “Perhaps,”
said he “the storm might have been laid or averted by some great
Machiavelian act; by striking with one hand the great ringleaders, and
with the other making concessions to the nation, granting freely the
reformation required by the age, part of which had already been
mentioned in the famous royal sitting. And yet, after all,” he observed,
“this would only have been guiding and directing the Revolution.” He
thought that some other plan of the same kind might perhaps have
succeeded on the 10th of August, if the King had remained triumphant.
“These two periods,” he said, were the only ones which afforded any
chance, however desperate; for, at the affair of Versailles, the people
had not yet entirely shaken off their allegiance, and on the 10th of
August they were already beginning to be tired of disorder. But those
who were chiefly interested in quelling the revolutionary spirit were
not adequate to encounter the difficulties of the moment.”

The Emperor then rapidly ran over the series of errors committed during
this period. “The line of conduct then pursued,” said he, “was truly
pitiable. Louis XVI. should have had a prime minister, and M. Necker
under him in the finance department. Prime ministers seem to have been
invented for the last reigns of the French monarchy; and yet the
prevailing false notions and vanity of the time caused them to be
dispensed with.”

A great deal was said respecting the equivocal conduct of several great
personages during this critical period, and the Emperor said: “We
condemn Louis XVI.; but, independently of his weakness, he was placed in
peculiar circumstances. He was the first monarch on whom the experiment
of modern principles was tried. His education, his innate ideas, led him
to believe sincerely that all that he defended, either openly or
secretly, belonged to him of right. There might be a sort of honesty
even in his want of faith, if I may so express myself. At a subsequent
period, the same conduct would have been inexcusable, and even
reprehensible. Add to all this that Louis XVI. had every body against
him, and one may form an idea of the innumerable difficulties which Fate
had accumulated on that unhappy Prince. The misfortunes of the Stuarts,
which have excited such deep interest, were not more severe.”

            THE BODY-GUARD OF THE KING OF FRANCE.—A DESERTER
                        IN THE EMPEROR’S SUITE.

4th.—The Emperor sent for me after he had finished his breakfast. He was
stretched on a sofa, with several books scattered about him. He wore his
nightcap, and looked pale. “Las Cases,” said he, “I am unwell. I have
been looking over a great many books, but I can find nothing to interest
me. I feel wearied.” He fixed his eye on me; that eye, naturally so
animated, was now dim, and its expression told me more than his eye had
uttered. “Sit down,” said he, pointing to a chair that was beside him,
loaded with books, “and let us chat.” He spoke of the Island of Elba, of
the life he had led there, of some visits which he had received, &c. He
then put some questions to me concerning Paris and the French Court
during the corresponding period. The conversation having led to the
mention of the King’s body-guard, some one present remarked, as a
curious circumstance, that there was a deserter from the guard in
Napoleon’s suite at St. Helena. “How? explain yourself,” said the
Emperor.—“Sire,” continued the person who had just spoken, “at the time
of the restoration, one of the captains of the guard, for whom I
entertained great friendship, and who, in spite of the difference of our
opinions, had always evinced a high regard for me, proposed to enter my
son in his company, assuring me that he would treat him as though he
were his own. I replied that he was too young, and that the appointment
might retard the progress of his education; but my friend silenced all
my objections. I however requested some time to consider of the matter;
and on my mentioning it to some persons of my acquaintance, they were
astonished that I should have declined so good an offer, and assured me
that in a short time my son might attain great advancement, without any
interruption of his education. I then waited on the captain of the
guard, and acknowledged that I had not shewn myself sufficiently
grateful for his offer; and he replied that he was fully aware I had not
understood the extent of the advantage he proposed to me. However, by
one circumstance or another, your Majesty returned before my son had the
honour of being presented to his colonel, and as I took him from his
Lyceum on our departure for St. Helena, he is clearly and truly a
deserter.” The Emperor laughed heartily and said; “This is another
effect of revolutions! What new interests, connexions, and opinions do
they create! It is fortunate when they do not disunite families, and set
the best friends at variance with each other.” He then began to question
me concerning my family, and concluded by saying, “I saw in Alphonse de
Beauchamp’s work, your name mentioned among the individuals who, on the
30th of March, endeavoured to excite demonstrations in favour of the
Royal Family in the Place Louis XV. I know it was not you; I think you
once explained the matter to me, but I have forgotten the
particulars.”—“Sire,“ said I, “it was a cousin of mine, of the same
name. The circumstance vexed me a good deal at the time; I inserted
contradictions in the journals; and it was rather droll that my cousin,
on his part, addressed letters to the public prints, desiring that he
might be particularly specified as the individual alluded to. I believe
that the general way in which the name was introduced, in Alphonse de
Beauchamp’s work, was kindly meant on the part of the author, who
wished, by this means, to afford me an opportunity of ingratiating
myself in the favour of the ruling party, if I had a mind to do so. I
must do my cousin the justice to say that, when I obtained an
appointment about your Majesty’s person, I several times offered to
solicit for him a post in your household or elsewhere; but this he
constantly declined. I wish he may now enjoy the reward of his
fidelity.” The Emperor again repeated that all private interests were
subverted by revolutions. “And it is these private wounds,” said he,
“which occasion the general ferment, and render the shocks so acute and
violent.”

The weather was so bad the whole of the day that it was impossible to go
out. The Emperor dismissed me and sent for General Gourgaud, to whom he
dictated in his library, from two to six o’clock, almost the whole of
Moreau’s campaign during the Consulate. After dinner, he read to us
Madame de Maintenon’s celebrated sumptuary letter to her brother, in
which she fixes her household expenditure at six thousand francs a-year.
The Emperor had several volumes of the _Grands Hommes_ brought to him,
and, after perusing some articles, he amused himself by looking at the
outline portraits at the end of each volume.

             NAPOLEON’S REPROOFS, &C. THE GOVERNOR BARGAINS
                           FOR OUR EXISTENCE.

5th.—To-day, in the course of my morning conversation with the Emperor,
I happened to mention some acts of oppression and injustice, which
excited dissatisfaction in the public mind, and rendered him unpopular,
because they were executed in his name, and were by many supposed to
emanate from him. “But how?” said he, “was there no one among the
multitude that surrounded me, none of my chamberlains, who had
sufficient spirit and independence to complain and bring these matters
to my knowledge? I would have rendered justice wherever it had been
withheld.”—“Sire, few would have ventured to call your attention to
these things.”—“Did you really stand so much in awe of me? I suppose you
dreaded my sharp rebuffs; but you ought to have known that I always lent
a ready ear to every one, and that I never refused to administer
justice. You should have balanced the reward of the good action against
the danger of the reprimand. After all, I confess that my reproofs were
in most instances the result of calculation. They were frequently the
only means I possessed of learning a man’s temper, of discovering by
stealth the different shades of his character. I had little time for
inquiry; and a reprimand was one of my experiments. For example, I
lately gave you a repulse, and this enabled me to discover that you were
somewhat headstrong, extremely susceptible, sufficiently candid, but
sullen; and, I may say, too sensitive,” he added, pinching my ear. “I
was,” continued he, “obliged to surround myself, as it were, with a halo
of fear; otherwise, having risen as I did from amidst the multitude,
many would have made free to eat out of my hand, or to slap me on the
shoulder. We are naturally inclined to familiarity.”

The weather continued very bad, and the Emperor spent the chief part of
the day in writing, as he did yesterday.

The Governor has renewed his cavilling on the subject of our supplies,
descending into petty details about a few bottles of wine, or a few
pounds of meat. Instead of eight thousand pounds, the sum fixed by
Government, he now applied for an allowance of twelve thousand, which he
himself declared to be indispensable; but he insisted on having the
surplus delivered into his own hands, or subjecting us to great
retrenchments. He bargained for our existence. When this was mentioned
to the Emperor he replied that the Governor might do as he pleased; but
he desired, at all events, that he might not be troubled about the
business.

In the evening the conversation again turned on Madame de Maintenon, and
the Emperor made many remarks on her letters, her character, her
influence on the affairs of her time, &c. He asked for the Historical
Dictionary to read the articles on the Noailles family; and he retired
to rest at eleven o’clock.

            CONFIDENTIAL CONVERSATION.—THE LETTERS OF MADAME
                       DE MAINTENON AND SEVIGNÉ.

6th.—The weather proved as bad as it had been on the preceding day.
After finishing his toilet, the Emperor retired to his library, attended
by one of his suite, with whom he held a long confidential conversation
on a topic intimately concerning us.

“We have now,” said he, “been at St. Helena more than a year, and with
regard to certain points we remain just as we were on the first day of
our arrival. I must confess that I have hitherto come to no
determination in my own mind upon these subjects. This is very unlike
me; but how many mortifications have I to encounter! A victim to the
persecutions of Fate and man, I am assailed every where and on all
hands. Even you, my faithful friends and consolers, help to lacerate the
wound. I am vexed and distressed by your jealousies and
dissensions.”—“Sire,” replied the individual to whom he addressed
himself, “these things should remain unnoticed by your Majesty. In all
that concerns you, our jealousy is merely emulation; and all our
dissension ceases on the expression of your slightest wish. We live only
for you, and will always be ready to obey you. To us you are the _Old
Man of the Mountain_; you may command us in all things, except
crime.”—“Well,” said the Emperor, “I will think seriously of the subject
I have just alluded to, and each shall have his own particular task.” He
dictated a few notes, and afterwards went down to the garden, where he
walked about for a short time alone, and then withdrew to his own
apartment.

The Emperor did not quit his chamber until the moment dinner was
announced. He resumed his remarks on Madame de Maintenon, whose letters
he had been reading. “I am charmed,” said he, “with her style, her
grace, and the purity of her language. If I am violently offended by
what is bad, I am at the same time exquisitely sensible to what is good.
I think I prefer Madame de Maintenon’s letters to those of Madame de
Sevigné: they tell more. Madame de Sevigné will certainly always remain
the true model of the epistolary style; she has a thousand charms and
graces, but there is this defect in her writings, that one may read a
great deal of them without retaining any impression of what one has
read. They are like trifles, which a man may eat till he is tired
without overloading his stomach.”

The Emperor then made some observations on grammar. He asked for the
grammar of Domairon, who had been our professor at the military school
at Paris. He glanced through it with evident pleasure. “Such is the
influence of youthful impressions,” said he; “I suspect that Domairon’s
is not the best of grammars, yet to me it will always be the most
agreeable. I shall never open it without experiencing a certain
pleasure.”

ERRORS OF THE ENGLISH MINISTERS.—MEANS OF WHICH ENGLAND MIGHT HAVE
  AVAILED HERSELF FOR THE LIQUIDATION OF HER DEBT.—THE GOVERNOR’S
  REDUCTIONS.

7th.—The Emperor remained within doors the whole of the day. The
Governor appeared on the grounds accompanied by a numerous party; but we
fled at his approach. Several vessels have been observed out at sea.

I was summoned to attend the Emperor, and I found him engaged in
perusing a work on the state of England. This became the subject of
conversation; the Emperor said a great deal respecting the enormous
national debt of England, the disadvantageous peace she had concluded,
and the different means by which she might have extricated herself from
her difficulties.

Napoleon possesses in an eminent degree the instinct of order and
harmony. I once knew a man who, being much engaged in arithmetical
calculations, confessed that he could not enter a drawing-room without
being led irresistibly to count the people who were in it; and that,
when he sat down to table, he could not help summing up the number of
plates, glasses, &c. Napoleon, though in a more elevated sphere, has
also an irresistible habit of his own, which is to develop the grand and
the beautiful in every subject that comes under his attention. If he
happens to converse about a city, he immediately suggests improvements
and embellishments; if a nation be the object of his consideration, he
expatiates on the means of promoting her glory, prosperity, useful
institutions, &c. Many of his observations, that have already been noted
down, must have rendered this fact obvious to the reader.

Either the contents of the journals and other publications of the day,
or the nature of our situation here, occasioned the Emperor’s attention
to be constantly directed to the state of England. He frequently
adverted to what she ought to have done, as well as to what she still
had to do, and which might render her future condition more prosperous.
I subjoin here a few of the observations, on this subject, which escaped
him at various times:—

“The Colonial system,” said he one day, “is now at an end for all; for
England, who possesses every colony, and for the other powers, who
possess none. The empire of the seas now belongs indisputably to
England; and why should she, in a new situation, wish to continue the
old routine? Why does she not adopt plans that would be more profitable
to her? She must look forward to a sort of emancipation of her colonies.
In the course of time, many will doubtless escape from her dominion, and
she should therefore avail herself of the present moment to obtain new
securities and more advantageous connexions. Why does she not propose
that the majority of her colonies shall purchase their emancipation by
taking upon themselves a portion of the general debt, which would thus
become specially theirs. The mother-country would by this means relieve
herself of her burthens, and would nevertheless preserve all her
advantages. She would retain, as pledges, the faith of treaties,
reciprocal interests, similarity of language, and the force of habit;
she might moreover reserve, by way of guarantee, a single fortified
point, a harbour for the ships, after the manner of the factories on the
coast of Africa. What would she lose? Nothing; and she would spare
herself the trouble and expense of an administration which, too often,
serves only to render her odious. Her ministers, it is true, would have
fewer places to give away; but the nation would certainly be no loser.

“I doubt not,” added he, “that, with a thorough knowledge of the
subject, some useful result might be derived from the ideas which I have
just thrown out, however erroneous they may be in their first hasty
conception. Even with regard to India, great advantages might be
obtained by the adoption of new systems. The English who are here,
assure me that England derives nothing from India in the balance of her
trade; the expenses swallow up, or even exceed, the profits. It is
therefore merely a source of individual advantage, and of a few private
fortunes of colossal magnitude; but these are so much food for
ministerial patronage, and therefore good care is taken not to meddle
with them. Those nabobs, as they are styled, on their return to England,
are useful recruits to the aristocracy. It signifies not that they bear
the disgrace of having acquired fortunes by rapine and plunder, or that
they exercise a baneful influence on public morals by exciting in others
the wish to gain the same wealth by the same means; the present
ministers are not so scrupulous as to bestow a thought on such matters.
These men give them their votes; and, the more corrupt they are, the
more easily are they controlled. In this state of things, where is the
hope of reform? Thus, on the least proposition of amendment, what an
outcry is raised! The English aristocracy is daily taking a stride in
advance; but, as soon as there is any proposal for retrograding, were it
only for the space of an inch, a general explosion takes place. If the
minutest details be touched, the whole edifice begins to totter. This is
very natural. If you attempt to deprive a glutton of his mouthful he
will defend himself like a hero.”

On another occasion the Emperor said:—“After a twenty year’s war, after
the blood and treasures that were lavished in the common cause, after a
triumph beyond all hope, what sort of peace has England concluded? Lord
Castlereagh had the whole Continent at his disposal, and yet what
advantage, what indemnity, has he secured to his own country? He has
signed just such a peace as he would have signed had he been conquered.
I should not have required him to make greater sacrifices had I been
victorious. But, perhaps, England thought herself sufficiently happy in
having effected my overthrow; in that case, hatred has avenged me!
During our contest, England was animated by two powerful sentiments—her
national interest and her hatred of me. In the moment of triumph, the
violence of the one caused her to lose sight of the other. She has paid
dearly for that moment of passion!“ He developed his idea, glancing at
the different measures which demonstrated the blunders of Castlereagh,
and the many advantages which he had neglected. “Thousands of years will
roll away,” said he, “before there occurs such another opportunity of
securing the welfare and real glory of England. Was it ignorance, or
corruption, on the part of Castlereagh? He distributed the spoil
generously, as he seemed to think, among the Sovereigns of the
Continent, and reserved nothing for his own country; but, in so doing,
did he not fear the reproach of being considered as the agent rather
than the partner of the Holy Allies? He gave away immense territories;
Russia, Prussia, and Austria acquired millions of population. Where is
the equivalent to England? She, who was the soul of all this success,
and who paid so dearly for it, now reaps the fruit of the _gratitude_ of
the Continent, and of the errors or treachery of her negotiator. My
continental system is continued; and the produce of her manufactures is
excluded. Why not have bordered the Continent with free and independent
maritime towns, such, for example, as Dantzick, Hamburg, Antwerp,
Dunkirk, Genoa, &c., which would of necessity have become the staples of
her manufactures, and would have scattered them over Europe, in spite of
all the duties in the world. England possessed the right of doing this,
and her circumstances required it: her decisions would have been just,
and who would have opposed them at the moment of the liberation? Why did
she create to herself a difficulty, and, in course of time, a natural
enemy, by uniting Belgium to Holland, instead of securing two immense
resources for her trade, by keeping them separate? Holland, which has no
manufactures of her own, would have been the natural depôt for English
goods; and Belgium, which might have become an English colony, governed
by an English Prince, would have been the channel for dispersing these
goods over France and Germany. Why not have bound down Spain and
Portugal by a commercial treaty of long duration, which would have
repaid all the expenses incurred for their deliverance, and which might
have been obtained under pain of the enfranchisement of their colonies,
the trade of which, in either case, England would have commanded? Why
not have stipulated for some advantages in the Baltic, and to balance
the States of Italy? These would have been but the regular privileges
attached to the dominion of the seas. After so long a contest in support
of this right, how happened its advantages to be neglected at the moment
when it was really secured? Did England, while she sanctioned usurpation
in others, fear that opposition would be offered to hers? and by whom
could it have been offered? Probably England repents now, when it is too
late; the opportunity cannot be recovered; she suffered the favourable
moment to escape her!... How many _whys_ and _wherefores_ might I not
multiply!... None but Lord Castlereagh would have acted thus: he made
himself the man of the Holy Alliance, and in course of time he will be
the object of execration. The Lauderdales, the Grenvilles, and the
Wellesleys, would have pursued a very different course; they would at
least have acted like Englishmen.”

At another time the Emperor said;—“The national debt is the canker-worm
that preys on England; it is the chain of all her difficulties. It
occasions the enormity of taxation, and this in its turn raises the
price of provisions. Hence the distress of the people, the high price of
labour and of manufactured goods which are not brought with equal
advantage to the continental markets. England then ought at all hazards
to contend against this devouring monster; she should assail it on all
sides, and at once subdue it _negatively_ and _positively_, that is to
say, by the reduction of her expenditure and the increase of her
capital.

“Can she not reduce the interest of her debt, the high salaries, the
sinecures, and the various expenses attending her army establishment,
and renounce the latter, in order to confine herself to her navy? In
short, many things might be done, which I cannot now enter into. With
regard to the increase of her capital, can she not enrich herself with
the ecclesiastical property, which is immense, and which she would
acquire by a salutary reform, and by the extinction of titular dignities
which would give offence to no one? But if a word be uttered on this
subject, the whole aristocracy is up in arms, and succeeds in putting
down the opposition; for in England it is the aristocracy that governs,
and for which the Government acts. They repeat the favourite adage,
that, if the least stone of the old foundation be touched, the whole
fabric will fall to the ground. This is devoutly re-echoed by the
multitude; consequently reform is stopped, and abuses are suffered to
increase and multiply.

“It is but just to acknowledge that, in spite of a compound of odious,
antiquated, and ignoble details, the English constitution presents the
singular phenomenon of a happy and grand result; and the advantages
arising out of it secure the attachment of the multitude, who are
fearful of losing any of the blessings they enjoy. But is it to the
objectionable nature of the details that this result must be attributed?
On the contrary, it would shine with increased lustre if the grand and
beautiful machine were freed from its mischievous appendages.

“England,” continued the Emperor, “presents an example of the dangerous
effects of the borrowing system. I would never listen to any hints for
the adoption of that system in France; I was always a firm opposer of
it. It was said, at the time, that I contracted no loans for want of
credit, and because I could find no one willing to lend; but this was
false. Those who know any thing of mankind and the spirit of
stock-jobbing, will be convinced that loans may always be raised by
holding out the chance of gain and the attraction of speculation. But
this was no part of my system, and, by a special law, I fixed the amount
of the public debt at what had generally been supposed to be conducive
to the general prosperity, namely, at eighty millions interest for my
France in her utmost extent, and after the union with Holland, which of
itself produced an augmentation of twenty millions. This sum was
reasonable and proper; a greater one would have been attended by
mischievous consequences. What was the result of this system? What
resources have I left behind me? France, after so many gigantic efforts
and terrible disasters, is now more prosperous than ever! Are not her
finances the first in Europe? To whom and to what are these advantages
to be attributed? So far was I from wishing to swallow up the future,
that I had resolved to leave a treasure behind me. I had even formed
one, the funds of which I lent to different banking-houses, embarrassed
families, and persons who held offices about me.

“I should not only have carefully preserved the sinking fund, but I
calculated on having, in course of time, funds which would have been
constantly increasing, and which might have been actively applied for
the furtherance of public works and improvements. I should have had the
fund of the Empire for general works; the fund of the departments for
local works; the fund of the communes for municipal works, &c.”

In the course of another conversation, the Emperor observed:—“England is
said to traffic in every thing: why, then, does she not sell liberty,
for which she might get a high price, and without any fear of exhausting
her own stock; for modern liberty is essentially moral, and does not
betray its engagements. For example, what would not the poor Spaniards
give her to free them from the yoke to which they have been again
subjected? I am confident that they would willingly pay any price to
recover their freedom. It was I who inspired them with this sentiment;
and the error into which I fell might, at least, be turned to good
account by another government. As to the Italians, I have planted in
their hearts principles that never can be rooted out. What can England
do better than to promote and assist the noble impulses of modern
regeneration? Sooner or later, this regeneration must be accomplished.
Sovereigns and old aristocratic institutions may exert their efforts to
oppose it, but in vain. They are dooming themselves to the punishment of
Sisyphus; but, sooner or later, some arms will tire of resistance, and,
on the first failure, the whole will tumble about their ears. Would it
not be better to yield with a good grace?—this was my intention. Why
does England refuse to avail herself of the glory and advantage she
might derive from this course of proceeding? Every thing passes away in
England as well as elsewhere. Castlereagh’s administration will pass
away, and that which may succeed it, and which is doomed to inherit the
fruit of so many errors, may become great by only discontinuing the
system that has hitherto been pursued. He who may happen to be placed at
the head of the English cabinet, has merely to allow things to take
their course, and to obey the winds that blow. By becoming the leader of
liberal principles, instead of leaguing with absolute power, like
Castlereagh, he will render himself the object of universal benediction,
and England will forget her wrongs. Fox was capable of so acting, but
Pitt was not; the reason is, that, in Fox, the heart warmed the genius;
while, in Pitt, the genius withered the heart. But it may be asked, why
I, all-powerful as I was, did not pursue the course I have here traced
out?—how, since I can speak so well, I could have acted so ill? I reply
to those who make this inquiry with sincerity, that there is no
comparison between my situation and that of the English government.
England may work on a soil which extends to the very bowels of the
earth; while I could labour only on a sandy surface. England reigns over
an established order of things; while I had to take upon myself the
great charge, the immense difficulty, of consolidating and establishing.
I purified a revolution, in spite of hostile factions. I combined
together all the scattered benefits that could be preserved; but I was
obliged to protect them with a nervous arm against the attacks of all
parties; and in this situation it may truly be said that the public
interest, _the State, was myself_.

“Our principles were attacked from without; and, in the name of these
very principles, I was assailed in the opposite sense at home. Had I
relaxed ever so little, we should soon have been brought back to the
time of the Directory; I should have been the object, and France the
infallible victim, of a _counter-Brumaire_. We are in our nature so
restless, so busy, so loquacious! If twenty revolutions were to happen,
we should have twenty constitutions. This is one of the subjects that
are studied most, and observed the least. We have much need to grow
older in this fair and glorious path; for here our great men have all
shewn themselves to be mere children. May the present generation profit
by the faults that have hitherto been committed, and prove as wise as it
is enthusiastic!”

To-day the Governor commenced his grand reductions, and it was thought
proper to deprive us of eight English domestics, who had formerly been
granted to us. To the servants this was a subject of deep regret, and it
was gratifying to ourselves to observe that we won the regard of all who
were permitted to approach us. We are now absolutely in want of daily
necessaries, to supply which the Emperor proposes to dispose of his
plate; this is his only resource.

After dinner the Emperor read the _Cercle_, and retired immediately,
although it was very early in the evening. He was indisposed, and could
not sleep. He sent for me about midnight. By chance I had not retired to
rest, and I remained in conversation with him for two hours.

THE EMPEROR’S COURT AT THE TUILERIES.—THE PRESENTATION OF THE LADIES.—ON
  WOMEN’S AGES.—MANUSCRIPT OF THE ISLAND OF ELBA.

8th.—The Emperor sent for me very early: he was just finishing his
toilet. He had had no sleep during the night, and he seemed much
fatigued. The weather had become somewhat tolerable, and he desired to
have his breakfast under the tent. While it was preparing, he took a few
turns about the garden, and resumed the conversation he had had with me
on the preceding night.

He invited Madame de Montholon to breakfast, and afterwards we took a
drive in the calash, of which the Emperor had made no use for a
considerable time. He had scarcely breathed the fresh air for several
days.

The conversation once more turned on the subject of the Emperor’s Court
at the Tuileries, the multitude of persons composing it, the spirit and
address with which Napoleon went through the ceremony of the
presentations, &c. I pass over many of the observations that were made,
for the sake of avoiding repetition.

“It is more difficult than is generally supposed,” said the Emperor, “to
speak to every body in a crowded assemblage, and yet say nothing to any
one; to seem to know a multitude of people, nine-tenths of whom are
total strangers to one.”

Again, when alluding to the period when he was in the plentitude of his
power, he observed that it was at once easy and difficult to approach
him, to communicate with him, and to be appreciated by him; and that it
depended on the merest chance in the world whether his courtiers made or
missed their fortune. “Now that I am myself entirely out of the
question,” said he, “now that I am a mere private individual, and can
reflect philosophically on the time when I was called to execute the
designs of Providence, without, however, ceasing to be a man, I see how
much the fate of those I governed really depended upon chance; and how
often favour and credit were purely accidental. Intrigue is so
dexterous, and merit often so awkward, and these extremes approximate so
closely to each other that, with the best intentions in the world, I
find that my benefits were distributed like prizes in a lottery. And yet
could I have done better? “Was I faulty in my intentions, or remiss in
my exertions? Have other sovereigns done better than I did? It is only
thus that I can be judged. The fault was in the nature of my situation,
and in the force of things.”

We then spoke of the presentation of the ladies at Court, their
embarrassment, and the plans, views, and hopes that were formed by some
of them. Madame de Montholon revealed the secrets of several of her
acquaintance, by which it appeared that if in the saloons of Paris some
were heard to exclaim against the Emperor’s coarseness of manners,
harshness of expression, and ugliness of person, others, who were better
disposed, better informed, and differently affected, extolled the
sweetness of his voice, the grace of his manners, the delicacy of his
smile, and above all, his famous hand, which was said to be ridiculously
handsome.

These advantages, it was observed, combined with great power and still
greater glory, were naturally calculated to excite and to give rise to
certain romantic stories. Thus at the Tuileries how many endeavoured to
render themselves pleasing to the sovereign! How many sought to inspire
a sentiment which it is probable they themselves really felt!

The Emperor smiled at our remarks and conjectures; and he confessed
that, notwithstanding the mass of business and the cloud of flattery in
which he was enveloped, he had oftener than once observed the sentiments
to which we alluded. A few of the least timid among his admirers had, he
said, even solicited and obtained interviews. We now laughed in our
turn, and said that, at the time, these stories had been the subject of
a great deal of mirth. But the Emperor seriously protested that they
were void of foundation. In a more private conversation at the Briars,
during one of our walks by moonlight, the Emperor, as I have stated in a
former part of my Journal, made the same assertion, and contradicted
every report of this nature, except one.

Our next subject of conversation was the repugnance of women to let
their age be known. The Emperor made some very lively and entertaining
remarks. An instance was mentioned of a woman who preferred losing an
important law-suit to confessing her age. The case would have been
decided in her favour, had she produced the register of her baptism, but
this she could not be prevailed on to do.

Another anecdote of the same kind was mentioned. A certain lady was much
attached to a gentleman, and was convinced that her union with him would
render her happy; but she could not marry without proving the date of
her birth, and she preferred remaining single.

The Emperor informed us that a distinguished lady, at the time of her
marriage, had deceived her husband, and represented herself to be five
or six years younger than she really was, by producing the baptismal
register of her younger sister, who had been dead some time.

“However,” said the Emperor, “in so doing, poor Josephine exposed
herself to some risk. This might really have proved a case of nullity of
marriage.” These words furnished us with the key to certain dates,
which, at the Tuileries, were the subject of jesting and ridicule, and
which we then attributed wholly to the gallantry and extreme
complaisance of the Imperial Almanack.

About four o’clock the Emperor took a short walk. I did not accompany
him. On his return, he informed us that he had visited the Company’s
garden, where he had met several very pretty women. “But I had not my
interpreter with me,” he added, pointing to me. “The rogue left me, and
nothing could be more provoking, for I never felt more inclined to avail
myself of his assistance.” This little walk, however, did the Emperor no
good, for he was presently seized with a severe tooth-ache.

A vessel, which had come from the Cape some time ago, sailed for Europe
this day. Several English military officers, who were passengers in this
ship, had not been permitted to wait on the Emperor, in spite of their
repeated solicitations. This was a new instance of the Governor’s spite.
These officers were men of distinction, and their reports on their
return home might have had some influence. The Governor, in defiance of
all truth, informed them that Napoleon had determined to receive no one.

The Emperor some time ago analyzed to us a subject which he said he
intended to dictate in fourteen chapters, and which had forcibly struck
me by its truth, its force, its just reasoning, and its dignity. I
frequently alluded to it when I happened to be alone with him; and he
laughed more than once at the perseverance I shewed, which, he said, was
not usual with me. To-day he informed me that he had at length produced
something, though not in fourteen chapters, nor on the promised subject;
but that I must be content with it. I have read it, and it is certainly
a very remarkable fragment. I do not believe that the Revolution has
produced any thing more comprehensive and energetic on the governments
of the last twenty-five years in France, namely, the Republic, the
Consulate, and the Empire.

The exposition and development of the ten chapters which compose this
work may be regarded as a perfect outline of the subject. The style is
remarkably simple and nervous. Each chapter is full and forcible, and
the whole, which consists of fifty pages, is struck off and finished
with a masterly hand. I have understood that the substance of these
ideas was to have formed the Emperor’s manifesto at the time of his
landing from Elba.

Since my return to Europe, this little work has been published, under
the title of _Manuscrit de l’Ile d’Elbe_; though I have reason to
believe that at first another title was intended for it. Be this as it
may, since the work is but little known, and as those who have read it
may be ignorant of its real origin, I here transcribe almost literally
several chapters, which will serve to prove its source and its
authenticity.

CHAP. I.—In the sixteenth century, the Pope, Spain, and the Sixteen,
  attempt in vain to raise a fourth dynasty to the throne of France.
  Henry IV. succeeds Henry III. without an interregnum: he conquers the
  League; but finds that the only way to secure himself on the throne is
  by sincerely joining the party which constitutes the majority of the
  nation.

”Henry IV. was proclaimed King at St. Cloud, on the day on which Henry
III. died. His sovereignty was acknowledged by all the Protestant
churches and by a part of the Catholic nobility. The Holy League which
had been formed against Henry III., in hatred of the Protestants, and to
avenge the death of the Duke of Guise, was master of Paris, and
commanded five-sixths of the kingdom. The Leaguers refused to
acknowledge Henry IV., but they proclaimed no other sovereign. The Duke
of Mayenne, the chief of the League, exercised authority under the title
of Lieutenant-general of the kingdom. The accession of Henry IV.
produced no change in the forms adopted by the League for exercising its
power; each town was governed as in disturbed and factious times, by
local or military authorities. At no period, not even on the day
succeeding his entrance into Paris, did Henry IV. acknowledge the acts
of the League, and the latter never set up any pretensions that he
should do so. No law, no regulation, emanated from the League. The
Parliament of Paris was divided into two parties; one for the Leaguers,
which sat at Paris, and the other for Henry IV., which assembled at
Tours. But these parliaments drew up and registered none but judicial
acts. The provinces retained their own organization and privileges, and
were governed by their own common laws. It has already been observed
that the League had not proclaimed any other sovereign; but it
acknowledged for a moment as King, the Cardinal de Bourbon, Henry’s
uncle. The Cardinal, however, did not consent to second the designs of
the enemies of his house. Besides, Henry had seized his person; no act
emanated from him, and the League continued subject to the authority of
the Lieutenant-general the Duke of Mayenne. There was therefore no
interregnum between Hen. III. and Hen. IV.

“The League was split into several parties. The Sorbonne had decided
that the rights of birth could confer no right to the crown on a Prince
who was an enemy to the Church. The Pope had declared that Henry IV.
having relapsed, had forfeited his rights for ever; and that he could
not recover them, even though he should return to the bosom of the
Church. Henry IV., King of Navarre, was born a Protestant; but on the
massacre of St. Bartholomew, he was compelled to marry Margaret de
Valois, and to abjure the reformed religion. However, as soon as he
withdrew from the Court, and found himself amidst the Protestants on the
left bank of the Loire, he declared that his abjuration had been wholly
compulsory, and he again embraced the Protestant faith. This step caused
him to be characterized as an obstinate renegado; but the majority of
the League were of opinion that it would be proper to summon Henry to
return to the bosom of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Romish Church; and
acknowledge him as sovereign, as soon as he should abjure Protestantism
and receive absolution from the Bishops.

“The leaguers convoked the States-general of the kingdom at Paris. The
Spanish ambassadors now unmasked the designs of their sovereign, and
urged the States to establish a fourth dynasty on the throne of France,
on the ground that Henry and Condé, having, by their apostacy, forfeited
their rights to the crown, the male line of the Capets was extinct. They
accordingly set forth the claims of the Infanta of Spain, the daughter
of Henry II. of France, who was the first in the female line. Even
supposing that, by the extinction of the male line of descent, the
nation possessed the right of disposing of the crown, they still
insisted that its choice ought to fall on the Infanta, for two reasons:
first, because it was impossible to select a princess of more
illustrious family; and secondly, because France was indebted to Philip
II. for his exertions in supporting the cause of the League. The Infanta
was to marry a French Prince, and mention was even made of the Duke of
Guise, the son of the Duke who had been assassinated at Blois. There was
already a body of Spanish troops in Paris, commanded by the Duke of
Mayenne; and it was proposed that an army of 50,000 Spaniards should be
maintained in Paris by the Court of Madrid, which would devote its whole
power and resources to ensure the triumph of this fourth dynasty. The
sixteen supported these propositions, which were sanctioned by the Court
of Rome, and seconded by the utmost efforts of the Legate. But all was
vain; public spirit was roused at the idea of a foreign nation disposing
of the throne of France. That part of the Parliament which sat at Paris
addressed remonstrances to the Duke of Mayenne the Lieutenant-general of
the kingdom, and urged him to enforce the observance of the fundamental
laws of the monarchy, and of the Salic law in particular. Had the
designs of the Spanish faction succeeded; had the Statesgeneral declared
the crown forfeited by the descendants of Hugues Capet; had a fourth
dynasty been raised to the throne, accepted by the nation, and
sanctioned by the religion acknowledged among the powers of Europe, the
rights of the third dynasty would have been extinct.

“Henry conquered the League at Arques and on the plains of Ivry, and he
then besieged Paris. However, he was convinced of the impossibility of
reigning in France, unless he joined the national party. He had
conquered with an army composed entirely of French troops: if he had
under his command a small corps of English, the Leaguers had a still
more considerable number of Spaniards and Italians. On both sides,
therefore, the contest had been maintained by Frenchmen against
Frenchmen; the foreigners were merely auxiliaries; the national honour
and independence could not be compromised, whichever party might be
declared victorious. _Ventre Saint-gris! Paris vaut bien une messe!_
were the exclamations by which Henry used to sound the opinion of the
Huguenots; and when, at the Council of Beauvais, he assembled the
principal leaders of the Protestant party, to deliberate on the
resolution which it was most expedient to adopt, the majority, and in
particular the most intelligent persons among them, advised the King to
abjure his faith and to join the national party. Henry pronounced his
abjuration at Saint-Denis, and received absolution from the Bishops; the
gates of Paris were thrown open to him, and his authority was
acknowledged by the whole kingdom. He now frankly espoused the national
party. Almost all the public posts were occupied by the Leaguers. The
Protestants, those who had constantly served the King, and to whom he
was indebted for his victories, frequently raised complaints against
him, and taxed him with ingratitude. Still, however, in spite of all the
discretion that was observed, the nation continued long to mistrust the
secret intentions of Henry. It was remarked that _what is bred in the
bone will never be out of the flesh_.

CHAP. II.—The republic sanctioned by the will of the people, by
  religion, by victory, and by all the Powers of Europe.

Hugues Capet ascended the throne by the choice of the Parliament,
consisting of Lords and Bishops, which two classes then constituted the
nation. The French monarchy was never absolute; the intervention of the
States General has always been necessary for sanctioning the principal
acts of the Legislature, and for levying new taxes. Subsequently, the
French Parliaments, under the pretence of being States General on a
small scale, and seconded by the Court, usurped the rights of the
nation. In 1788, the Parliaments were the first to acknowledge them.
Louis XVI. convoked the States General in 1789, and the nation exercised
a portion of the sovereignty. The Constituent Assembly framed a new
constitution for the state, which was sanctioned by the approval of the
whole French people, and which Louis XVI. accepted and swore to
maintain. The Legislative Assembly suspended the King. The convention,
which consisted of the deputies of all the primary assemblies in the
Kingdom, and which was invested with special powers, proclaimed the
abolition of the monarchy and the establishment of the Republic. The
adherents of the royal party fled from France, and solicited the aid of
foreign arms. Austria and Prussia signed the convention of Pilnitz; and
Austrian and Prussian armies, joined by the French royalist forces,
commenced the war of the first coalition to subdue the French people.
The whole nation took up arms; and the Austrians and Prussians were
conquered. The second coalition was afterwards formed by Austria,
England, and Russia; but this was destroyed like the first, and all the
Powers in Europe acknowledged the French Republic.

1st.—The Republic of Genoa, by an extraordinary embassy, on the 15th of
June, 1792.

2d.—The Porte, by a declaration, on the 27th of March, 1793.

3d.—Tuscany, by the treaty of the 9th of February, 1795.

4th.—Holland, by the treaty of 16th of May, 1795.

5th.—The Venetian Republic, by an extraordinary embassy, on the 30th of
December, 1795.

6th.—The King of Prussia, by the treaty signed at Bâle, on the 5th of
April, 1795.

7th.—The King of Spain, by the treaty signed at Bâle, on the 22nd of
July, 1795.

8th.—Hesse-Cassel, by the treaty of the 28th of July, 1795.

9th.—Switzerland, by the treaty of the 19th of August, 1795.

10th.—Denmark, by a declaration, on the 18th of August, 1795.

11th.—Sweden, by an embassy, on the 23rd of April, 1795.

12th.—Sardinia, by the treaty of Paris, on the 28th of April, 1796.

13th.—America, by an extraordinary embassy, on the 30th of December,
1796.

14th.—Naples, by the treaty of the 10th of October, 1796.

15th.—Parma, by the treaty of the 5th of November, 1796.

16th.—Wurtemburgh, by the treaty of the 7th of August, 1796.

17th.—Baden, by the treaty of the 22d of August, 1796.

18th.—Bavaria, by the treaty of the 24th of July, 1797.

19th.—Portugal, by the treaty of the 19th of August, 1797.

20th.—The Pope, by the treaty signed at Tolentino on the 19th of
February, 1797.

21st.—The Emperor of Germany, by the treaty of Campo-Formio, on the 7th
of October, 1797.

22d.—The Emperor of Russia, by a treaty signed on the 8th of October,
1801.

23d.—The King of England, by the treaty signed at Amiens on the 27th of
March 1802.

“The government of the Republic sent ambassadors to all the Powers of
Europe, and received envoys from those powers in return. The
tri-coloured flag was acknowledged in every sea, and throughout the
world. At Tolentino, the Pope had treated with the Republic as a
temporal sovereign; but he acknowledged and treated with it as head of
the Catholic religion, by the Concordat which was signed at Paris on the
18th of April, 1802. Most of the Bishops, who had followed the Royalist
party abroad, now submitted to the Republican government, and those who
refused forfeited their sees. In short, the French Republic, which was
sanctioned by the citizens, and victorious by its armies, was
acknowledged by every sovereign, every power, and every religion, in the
world, and in particular by the Catholic Church.

“Not only was the Republic acknowledged by all the powers in the world,
after the death of Louis XVI., but none of these powers ever
acknowledged a successor to him. In the year 1800, therefore, the third
dynasty was ended as completely as the first and second. The rights and
titles of the Merovingians were extinguished by the rights and titles of
the Carlovingians; the rights and titles of the Carlovingians were
extinguished by the rights and titles of the Capetians; and the rights
of the Capetians were, in like manner, extinguished by the Republic.
Every legitimate government supersedes the rights and the legitimacy of
the governments that have preceded it. The Republic was a government, in
fact and in right, rendered legitimate by the will of the nation,
sanctioned by the Church, and by the adhesion of all the world.

CHAP. III.—The Revolution rendered France a new nation:—it emancipated
  the Gauls from the tyranny of the Franks: it created new interests,
  and a new order of things conformable with the welfare and rights of
  the people, and the justice and knowledge of the age.

“The French Revolution was not produced by the jarring interests of two
families disputing the possession of the throne; it was a general rising
of the mass of the nation against the privileged classes. The French
nobility, like that of every country in Europe, dates its origin from
the incursion of the barbarians, who divided the Roman Empire among
them. In France, nobles represented the Franks, and the Burgundians, and
the rest of the nation, the Gauls. The feudal system which was
introduced established the principle that all land should have a lord.
All political privileges were exercised by the Priests and the Nobles;
the peasants were slaves, and in part attached to the glebe. The
progress of civilization and knowledge emancipated the people. This new
state of things promoted industry and trade. The chief portion of the
land, wealth, and information, belonged to the people in the eighteenth
century. The nobles, however, still continued to be a privileged class:
they were empowered to administer justice, and they possessed feudal
rights under various denominations and forms: they enjoyed the privilege
of being exempt from all the burdens of the state, and of possessing
exclusively the most honourable posts. These abuses roused the
indignation of the citizens. The principal object of the Revolution was
to destroy all privileges; to abolish signorial jurisdictions, justice
being an inseparable attribute of sovereign authority; to suppress
feudal rights, as being a remnant of the old slavery of the people; to
subject alike all citizens and all property, to the burdens of the
state. In short, the Revolution proclaimed equality of rights. A citizen
might attain any public employment, according to his talent and the
chances of fortune. The kingdom was composed of provinces which had been
united to the Crown at various periods: they had no natural limits, and
were differently divided, unequal in extent and in population. They
possessed many laws of their own, civil as well as criminal: they were
more or less privileged, and very unequally taxed, both with respect to
the amount and the nature of the contributions, which rendered it
necessary to detach them from each other by lines of custom-houses.
France was not a state, but a combination of several states, connected
together without amalgamation. The whole had been determined by chance
and by the events of past ages. The Revolution, guided by the principle
of equality, both with respect to the citizens and the different
portions of the territory, destroyed all these small nations: there was
no longer a Brittany, a Normandy, a Burgundy, a Champagne, a Provence,
or a Lorraine; but the whole formed a France. A division of homogeneous
territory, prescribed by local circumstances, confounded the limits of
all the provinces. They possessed the same judicial and administrative
organization, the same civil and criminal laws, and the same system of
taxation. The dreams of the upright men of all ages were realized. The
opposition which the Court, the Clergy, and the Nobility, raised against
the Revolution and the war with foreign powers, produced the law of
emigration and the sequestration of emigrant property, which
subsequently it was found necessary to sell, in order to provide for the
charges of the war. A great portion of the French nobility enrolled
themselves under the banner of the princes of the Bourbon family, and
formed an army which marched in conjunction with the Austrian, Prussian,
and English forces. Gentlemen who had been brought up in the enjoyment
of competency served as private soldiers: numbers were cut off by
fatigue and the sword; others perished of want in foreign countries; and
the wars of La Vendée and of the Chouans, and the revolutionary
tribunals, swept away thousands. Three-fourths of the French nobility
were thus destroyed; and all posts, civil, judicial, or military, were
filled by citizens who had risen from the common mass of the people. The
change produced in persons and property by the events of the Revolution,
was not less remarkable than that which was effected by the principles
of the Revolution. A new church was created; the dioceses of Vienne,
Narbonne, Frejus, Sisteron, Rheims, &c., were superseded by sixty new
dioceses, the boundaries of which were circumscribed, in the Concordat,
by new Bulls applicable to the present state of the French territory.
The suppression of religious orders, the sale of convents and of all
ecclesiastical property, were sanctioned, and the clergy were pensioned
by the State. Every thing that was the result of the events which had
occurred since the time of Clovis, ceased to exist. All these changes
were so advantageous to the people that they were effected with the
utmost facility, and, in 1800, there no longer remained any recollection
of the old privileges and sovereigns of the provinces, the old
parliaments and bailiwicks, or the old dioceses; and to trace back the
origin of all that existed, it was sufficient to refer to the new law by
which it had been established. One-half of the land had changed its
proprietors; the peasantry and the citizens were enriched. The
advancement of agriculture and manufactures exceeded the most sanguine
hopes. France presented the imposing spectacle of upwards of thirty
millions of inhabitants, circumscribed within their natural limits, and
composing only a single class of citizens, governed by one law, one
rule, and one order. All these changes were conformable with the welfare
and rights of the nation, and with the justice and intelligence of the
age.

CHAP. IV.—The French people establish the Imperial throne, to
  consolidate the new interests of the nation. The fourth dynasty did
  not immediately succeed the third; it succeeded the Republic. Napoleon
  is crowned by the Pope, and acknowledged by the Powers of Europe. He
  creates kings, and the armies of all the Continental Powers march
  under his command.

The five members of the Directory were divided. Enemies to the Republic
crept into the councils; and thus men, hostile to the rights of the
people, became connected with the government. This state of things kept
the country in a ferment; and the great interests which the French
people had acquired by the Revolution were incessantly compromised. One
unanimous voice, issuing from the plains of France and from her cities
and her camps, demanded the preservation of all the principles of the
Republic, or the establishment of an hereditary system of government,
which would place the principles and interests of the Revolution beyond
the reach of factions and the influence of foreigners. By the
constitution of the year VIII. the First Consul of the Republic became
Consul for ten years, and the nation afterwards prolonged his magistracy
for life: the people subsequently raised him to the throne, which it
rendered hereditary in his family. The principles of the sovereignty of
the people, of liberty and equality, of the destruction of the feudal
system, of the irrevocability of the sale of national domains, and the
freedom of religious worship, were now established. The government of
France, under the fourth dynasty, was founded on the same principles as
the Republic. It was a moderate and constitutional monarchy. There was
as much difference between the government of France under the fourth
dynasty and the third, as between the latter and the Republic. The
fourth dynasty succeeded the Republic, or, more properly speaking, it
was merely a modification of it.

No Prince ever ascended a throne with rights more legitimate than those
of Napoleon. The crown was not presented to him by a few Bishops and
Nobles; but he was raised to the Imperial throne by the unanimous
consent of the citizens, three times solemnly confirmed. Pope Pius VII.
the head of the Catholic religion, the religion of the majority of the
French people, crossed the Alps to anoint the Emperor with his own
hands, in the presence of the Bishops of France, the Cardinals of the
Romish Church, and the Deputies from all the districts of the Empire.
The sovereigns of Europe eagerly acknowledged Napoleon: all beheld with
pleasure the modification of the Republic, which placed France on a
footing of harmony with the rest of Europe, and which at once confirmed
the constitution and the happiness of that great nation. Ambassadors
from Austria, Russia, Prussia, Spain, Portugal, Turkey, and America, in
fine, from all the powers of Europe, came to congratulate the Emperor.
England alone sent no ambassador: she had violated the treaty of Amiens,
and had consequently again declared war against France; but even England
approved the change. Lord Whitworth, in the secret negotiations which
took place through the medium of Count Malouet, and which preceded the
rupture of the peace of Amiens, proposed, on the part of the English
government, to acknowledge Napoleon as King of France, on condition of
his agreeing to the cession of Malta. The First Consul replied that, if
ever the welfare of France required that he should ascend the throne, it
would only be by the free and spontaneous will of the French people. In
1806, when Lord Lauderdale came to Paris to negotiate peace between the
King of England and the Emperor, he exchanged his powers, as is proved
by the protocol of the negotiations, and he treated with the Emperor’s
plenipotentiary. The death of Fox broke up the negotiations of Lord
Lauderdale. The English Minister had it in his power to obviate the
Prussian campaign,[22] to prevent the battle of Jena. When, in 1814, the
Allies presented an _ultimatum_ at Chaumont, Lord Castlereagh, in
signing this _ultimatum_, again acknowledged the existence of the Empire
in the person and the family of Napoleon. If the latter did not accept
the propositions of the Congress of Chatillon, it was because he did not
conceive himself at liberty to cede a portion of the Empire, the
integrity of which he had, at his coronation, sworn to maintain.

The Electors of Bavaria, Wurtemberg, and Saxony, were created Kings by
Napoleon.

The armies of Saxony, Bavaria, Wurtemberg, Baden, and Hesse, fought in
conjunction with the French armies; and the Russian and French troops
fought together in 1809, in the war against Austria. In 1812, the
Emperor of Austria concluded at Paris an alliance with Napoleon, and
Prince Schwartzenburg commanded, under his orders, the Austrian
contingent in the Russian campaign, in which he attained the rank of
Field Marshal, on the application of the French Emperor. A similar
treaty of alliance was concluded at Berlin, and the Prussian army also
fought with the French in the campaign in Russia.

Footnote 22:

  While Lord Lauderdale was in Paris, and negotiating with the Emperor’s
  plenipotentiaries, Prussia took up arms and assumed a hostile
  attitude. Lord Lauderdale seemed to disapprove of this conduct, and to
  consider the contest very unequal. Being informed that Napoleon
  intended to march at the head of the army, he enquired whether the
  Emperor would consent to defer his departure, and to enter into
  arrangements with Prussia, if England would accept the basis of the
  negotiations, that is to say, the _uti possidetis_ on both sides,
  including Hanover. The discussion was maintained on the subject of
  Hanover, which England wished to recover independently of this basis.
  By the reply of the Cabinet of St. James’s, Lord Lauderdale was
  recalled. The Emperor set out, and the battle of Jena took place: Fox
  was then dead.

  We were, at this period, eye-witnesses to the regret and repugnance
  which Napoleon evinced at the necessity of going to war with Prussia.
  He was disposed to leave Hanover in the possession of that power, and
  to recognise a Confederation of the North of Germany. He felt that
  Prussia, having never been beaten or humbled by France, and her power
  being still unimpaired, she could have no interests hostile to his;
  but that, if once she were subdued, she must be destroyed.

The Emperor healed the wounds which the Revolution had inflicted: the
emigrants returned, and the list of proscription was obliterated.
Napoleon enjoyed the glory most gratifying to a monarch, by recalling
and re-establishing in their homes upwards of 20,000 families: their
unsold property was restored to them; and, the veil of oblivion being
thrown over the past, persons of every class, whatever line of conduct
they might previously have pursued, were admitted to all public
employments. Families who had distinguished themselves by the services
they had rendered to the Bourbons, those who had shewn themselves most
devoted to the Royal Family, filled places about the Court, and in the
ministry, and held commissions in the army. All party denominations were
forgotten: aristocrats and Jacobins were no longer spoken of; and the
institution of the Legion of Honour, which was at once the reward of
military, civil, and judicial services, placed on a footing of unity the
soldier, the man of science, the artist, the prelate, and the
magistrate; it became the badge of concord among all classes and all
parties.

CHAP. V.—The blood of the Imperial dynasty mingled with that of all the
  monarchical Houses in Europe; with those of Russia, Prussia, England,
  and Austria.

The Imperial House of France contracted alliances with all the sovereign
families of Europe. Prince Eugéne Napoleon, the adopted son of the
Emperor, married the eldest daughter of the King of Bavaria, a princess
distinguished for her beauty and her virtues. This alliance, which was
contracted at Munich on the 14th of January, 1806, afforded the highest
satisfaction to the Bavarian nation. The Hereditary Prince of Baden, the
brother-in-law of the Emperor of Russia, solicited the hand of Princess
Stephanie, the adopted daughter of the Emperor Napoleon: this marriage
was celebrated at Paris on the 7th of April, 1806. On the 22d of August,
1807, Prince Jerome Napoleon married the eldest daughter of the King of
Wurtemburg, cousin-german of the Emperor of Russia, the King of England,
and the King of Prussia. Other alliances of this nature were contracted
with sovereign princes of Germany, of the House of Hohenzollern. These
marriages have proved happy, and all have given birth to princes and
princesses, who will transmit to future generations the recollection of
the Imperial government of France.

“When the interests of France and the Empire induced the Emperor and the
Empress Josephine to break bonds which were equally dear to them both,
the greatest sovereigns in Europe courted the Alliance of Napoleon. Had
it not been for religious scruples, and the delays occasioned by
distance, it is probable that a Russian princess would have occupied the
throne of France. The Archduchess Maria Louisa, who was married to the
Emperor by procuration granted to Prince Charles, at Vienna, on the 11th
of March, 1810, and at Paris on the 2d of April following, ascended the
throne of France. As soon as the Emperor of Austria learned that
Napoleon’s marriage was in agitation, he expressed his surprise that an
alliance with the House of Austria had not been thought of. The choice
was hitherto divided between a Russian and a Saxon princess: Francis
explained his sentiments on this subject to the Count de Narbonne, the
Governor of Trieste, who was then at Vienna; and, in consequence,
instructions were forwarded to the Prince of Schwartzenberg, the
Austrian ambassador at Paris. In February, 1810, a Privy Council was
convoked at the Tuileries: the Minister for Foreign Affairs submitted to
the Council the despatches of the Duke of Vicenza, the French ambassador
at the Court of Russia. These communications shewed that the Emperor
Alexander was very much disposed to give his sister, the Grand-duchess
Anne, in marriage to Napoleon; but he seemed to make it a point of
importance that the Princess should be allowed the public exercise of
her religious worship, and a chapel appropriated to the Greek rites. The
despatches from Vienna developed the insinuations and the wishes of the
Austrian Court. There was a division of opinions in the French Council:
the Russian, the Saxon, and the Austrian alliance, all found supporters;
but the majority voted for the choice of an Archduchess of Austria. As
Prince Eugéne had been the first to propose the Austrian alliance, the
Emperor, breaking up the sitting at two in the morning, authorized him
to make overtures with Prince Schwartzenberg. He at the same time
authorized the Minister for Foreign Affairs to sign, in the course of
the day, the contract of marriage with the Austrian ambassador; and, to
obviate all difficulties with respect to the details, he directed him to
sign, word for word, the same contract as that which had been drawn up
for the marriage of Louis XVI. and the Archduchess Marie-Antoinette. In
the morning, Prince Eugéne had an interview with Prince Schwartzenberg:
the contract was signed the same day, and the courier who conveyed the
intelligence to Austria agreeably surprised the Emperor Francis. The
peculiar circumstances attending the signature of this marriage contract
led the Emperor Alexander to suspect that he had been trifled with, and
that the Court of the Tuileries had been conducting two negotiations at
once. But this was a mistake: the negotiation with Vienna was begun and
concluded in one day.[23]

Footnote 23:

  A report was pretty generally circulated that the marriage of the
  Archduchess Maria-Louisa with the Emperor Napoleon was a secret
  article of the treaty of Vienna: this idea is void of foundation. The
  treaty of Vienna is dated Oct. 15, 1809, and the marriage contract was
  signed at Paris on the 7th of Feb. 1810.

  Every individual who was present at the deliberations of the Privy
  Council can attest that the circumstances of the marriage were such as
  they have been above described; that no idea of the Austrian alliance
  was entertained before the contents of the Count de Narbonne’s
  despatches were made known; and that the marriage with the Archduchess
  Maria-Louisa was proposed, discussed, and determined on in the
  Council, and signed within the space of twenty-four hours.

  The members of the Council were—the Emperor, the great Dignitaries of
  the Empire, the high Officers of the Crown, all the Ministers, the
  Presidents of the Senate and the Legislative Body, and the Ministers
  of State, Presidents of the sections of the Council of State;
  amounting, in all, to 25.

“Never did the birth of any Prince excite so much enthusiasm in a
people, or produce so powerful a sensation throughout Europe, as the
birth of the King of Rome. On the firing of the first gun, which
announced the delivery of the Empress, the whole population of Paris was
in the most anxious suspense. In the streets, the promenades, at the
places of public amusement, and in the interior of the houses, all were
eagerly intent on counting the number of guns. The twenty-second excited
universal transport: it had been usual to discharge twenty-one guns on
the birth of a Princess, and a hundred and one on the birth of a Prince.
All the European Powers deputed the most distinguished noblemen of their
Courts to present their congratulations to the Emperor. The Emperor of
Russia sent his Minister of the Interior; and the Emperor of Austria
despatched Count Clary, one of his highest officers of the crown, who
brought, as presents to the young King, the collars of all the Orders of
the Austrian Monarchy set with diamonds. The baptism of the King of Rome
was celebrated with the utmost pomp, in the presence of the French
bishops, and deputies from all parts of the Empire. The Emperor of
Austria was sponsor to the young king by proxy; he was represented by
his brother, the Archduke Ferdinand, Grand-Duke of Tuscany.

CHAP. VI.—Containing some account of the campaign of Saxony,[24] and
  shewing that the league of 1813 was in its object foreign to the
  Restoration.

Footnote 24:

  I did not choose to suppress this summary of the campaign in Saxony,
  although the same subject has already been particularly treated of at
  the commencement of this volume. If, however, some readers should
  consider it merely a repetition, others will find in it the means of
  comparing and verifying what has been before stated: one of the
  accounts is drawn up from documents published in Europe, whilst the
  other was dictated at St. Helena by Napoleon himself.

“The victories of Lützen and Würtzen, on the 2nd and 22nd of May, 1813,
had re-established the reputation of the French arms. The King of Saxony
was brought back in triumph to his capital; the enemy was driven from
Hamburg; one of the corps of the grand army was at the gates of Berlin,
and the imperial head-quarters were established at Breslau. The Russian
and Prussian armies, disheartened by their defeats, had no alternative
but to repass the Vistula, when Austria interfered and advised France to
sign an armistice. Napoleon returned to Dresden, the Emperor of Austria
quitted Vienna and repaired to Bohemia, and the Emperor of Russia and
the King of Prussia established themselves at Schweidnitz.
Communications took place between the different Powers. Count Metternich
proposed the Congress of Prague, which was agreed on; but it was merely
the shadow of a Congress. The Court of Vienna had already entered into
engagements with Russia and Prussia, and intended to declare itself in
the month of May, when the unexpected success of the French army
rendered greater circumspection necessary. Notwithstanding all the
efforts which Austria had exerted, her army was still inconsiderable in
number, badly organized, and ill prepared to enter upon a campaign.
Count Metternich demanded, on the part of Austria, the surrender of the
Illyrian Provinces, one half of the kingdom of Italy, (that is to say,
Venice, as far as the Mincio,) and Poland. It was moreover required that
Napoleon should renounce the Protectorate of Germany, and the
departments of the thirty-second military division. These extravagant
propositions were advanced only that they might be rejected. The Duke of
Vicenza proceeded to the Congress of Prague. The choice of Baron
d’Anstetten, as the Russian plenipotentiary, shewed that Russia wished
not for peace, but was merely anxious to afford Austria time to complete
her military preparations. The unfavourable augury, occasioned by the
selection of Baron d’Anstetten as a negotiator, was confirmed: he
declined entering upon any conference. Austria, who pretended to act as
mediatrix, declared, when her army was in readiness, that she adhered to
the coalition, though she did not even require the opening of a single
sitting, or the drawing up of a single protocol. This system of bad
faith, and of perpetual contradictions between words and acts, was
unremittingly pursued, at this period, by the Court of Vienna. The war
was resumed. The brilliant victory gained by the Emperor at Dresden, on
the 27th of August, 1813, over the army commanded by the three
Sovereigns, was immediately followed by the disasters which Macdonald,
through his ill-concerted manœuvres, brought upon himself in Silesia,
and by the destruction of Vandamme’s force in Bohemia. However, the
superiority was still on the side of the French army, which supported
itself on three points, viz: Torgau, Wittenberg, and Magdeburg. Denmark
had concluded a treaty of alliance, offensive and defensive, and her
contingent augmented the army of Hamburg.

“In October, the Emperor quitted Dresden to proceed to Magdeburg, by the
left bank of the Elbe, in order to deceive the enemy. His intention was
to recross the Elbe at Wittenburg and to march on Berlin. Several corps
of the army had already arrived at Wittenburg, and the enemy’s bridges
at Dessau had been destroyed, when a letter from the King of Wurtemburg
informed the Emperor that the King of Bavaria had suddenly gone over to
the enemy; and that, without any declaration of war or any previous
intimation, the Austrian and Bavarian forces, cantoned on the banks of
the Inn, had formed themselves into one camp; that these forces,
amounting to 80,000, under the orders of General Wrede, were marching on
the Rhine; that he (the King of Wurtemberg), seeing the impossibility of
his opposing this united force, had been obliged to add his contingent
to it. The letter farther added that 100,000 men would soon surround
Mentz, the Bavarians having made common cause with Austria. Upon
receiving this unexpected intelligence, the Emperor found himself
compelled to change the plan of the campaign which he had projected two
months previously, and for which he had prepared the fortresses and
magazines. This plan had for its object to drive the Allies between the
Elbe and the Saale; and, under the protection of the fortresses and
magazines of Torgau, Wittemberg, Magdeburg, and Hamburg, to establish
the seat of war between the Elbe and the Oder (the French army being at
that time in possession of the fortresses of Glogau, Cüstrin, and
Stettin), and, according to circumstances, to raise the blockades of the
fortresses of the Vistula, Dantzick, Thorn, and Modlin. It was
anticipated that the success of this vast plan would have been the means
of breaking up the coalition, and that, in consequence, all the German
Princes would have been confirmed in their allegiance and their alliance
with France. It was hoped that Bavaria would have delayed for a
fortnight to change sides, and then it was certain that she would not
have changed at all.

“The armies met on the plains of Leipsic, on the 16th of October. The
French were victorious; the Austrians were beaten and driven from all
their positions; and Count Meerfeld, who commanded one of the Austrian
corps, was made prisoner. On the 18th, notwithstanding the check
sustained by the Duke of Ragusa on the 16th, victory was still on the
side of the French, when the whole of the Saxon army, with a battery of
sixty guns, occupying one of the most important positions of the line,
passed over to the enemy, and turned its artillery on the French ranks.
Such unlooked-for treachery could not but cause the destruction of the
French army, and transfer all the glory of the day to the Allies. The
Emperor galloped forward with half his guard, repulsed the Swedes and
Saxons, and drove them from their positions. This day (the 18th) was now
ended: the enemy made a retrograde movement along the whole of his line,
and bivouacked in the rear of the field of battle, which remained in the
possession of the French. In the night, the French army made a movement,
in order to take its position behind the Elster, and thus to be in
direct communication with Erfurt, whence were expected the convoys of
ammunition that were so much wanted. In the engagements of the 16th and
18th, the French army had fired more than 150,000 discharges of cannon.
The treachery of several of the German corps of the Confederation, who
were seduced by the example of the Saxons on the preceding day, and the
destruction of the bridge of Leipsic, which was blown up by mistake,
occasioned the French army, though victorious, to experience the losses
which usually result from the most disastrous engagements. The French
re-crossed the Saale by the bridge of Weissenfeld: they intended to
rally their forces, and await the arrival of the ammunition from Erfurt,
which had abundant supplies.

“Intelligence was now received of the Austro-Bavarian army, which, by
forced marches, had reached the Maine. It was necessary therefore to
repair thither, in order to come up with the Bavarians; and, on the 30th
of October, the French fell in with them, drawn up in order of battle
before Hanau and intercepting the Frankfort roads. The Bavarian force,
though numerous, and occupying fine positions, was completely routed,
and driven beyond Hanau, which was in the possession of Count Bertrand.
General Wrede was wounded. The French forces continued their movement
with the view of falling back behind the Rhine, and they re-crossed the
river on the 2nd of November. A parley ensued: Baron de St. Aignan
repaired to Frankfort, where he had conferences with Counts Metternich
and Nesselrode and Lord Aberdeen, and he arrived at Paris with proposals
for peace on the following bases:—That the Emperor Napoleon should
renounce the Protectorship of the Confederation of the Rhine, Poland,
and the departments of the Elbe; but that France should retain her
boundaries of the Alps and the Rhine, together with the possession of
Holland, and that a frontier line in Italy should be determined upon,
for separating France from the States of the House of Austria. The
Emperor agreed to these bases; but the Congress of Frankfort, like that
of Prague, was merely a stratagem employed in the hope that France would
reject the terms which were proposed. It was wished to have a new
subject for a manifesto to operate on the public mind; for at the moment
when these conciliatory propositions were made, the Allied army was
violating the neutrality of the cantons, and entering Switzerland.
However, the Allies at last developed their real intentions; they named
Chatillon-sur-Seine, in Burgundy, as the seat of the Congress. The
battles of Champ-Aubert, Montmirail, and Montereau, destroyed the armies
of Blucher and Witgenstein. No negotiations took place at Chatillon; but
the coalesced Powers presented an _ultimatum_, the conditions of which
were as follows:

“1st, That France should surrender the whole of Italy, Belgium, Holland,
and the departments of the Rhine; 2nd, that France should return to her
limits as they existed previously to 1792. The Emperor rejected this
_ultimatum_. He consented to sacrifice Holland and Italy to the
circumstances in which France was then placed; but he refused to resign
the limits of the Alps and the Rhine, or to surrender Belgium and
particularly Antwerp. Treason secured the triumph of the Allies,
notwithstanding the victories of Arcis and St. Dizier. Hitherto the
Allies had intimated no design of interfering in the internal affairs of
France; this is proved by the _ultimatum_ of Chatillon, signed by
England, Austria, Russia, and Prussia. At length, however, some of the
returned emigrants, excited by the presence of the Austrian, Russian,
and Prussian armies, in whose ranks they had long borne arms, imagined
that the moment had arrived in which their dreams were to be realized:
some mounted the white cockade, and others displayed the cross of St.
Louis. This conduct was disapproved by the Allied Sovereigns; and it was
even censured by Wellington at Bourdeaux, though in reality he secretly
favoured all who endeavoured to raise the ensigns of the House of
Bourbon. In the transactions which detached Prussia from her alliance
with France, and bound her to Russia by the treaty of Kalisch; in the
treaty which united Austria with the coalition; in the diplomatic
proceedings, public and private, which took place down to the treaty of
Chatillon; and even in that concluded in France, in 1814, the Allies
never made any reference to the Bourbons.”

The VIIth, VIIIth, and IXth Chapters shew that the Bourbons after their
return ought to have commenced a fifth dynasty, and not to have
endeavoured to continue the third. The first course would have rendered
all easy, the second has involved every thing in difficulty.

The Xth Chapter closes with a passage of a few lines which forcibly
describe the magical effect of the Emperor’s return on the 20th of
March. These last chapters contain the most nervous and energetic
writing, but the applications are direct, and indeed often personal. I
have suppressed the details, because I wish not to afford any ground for
my being accused of bringing forward a hostile statement. Time, which
modifies all things, will render this work merely an historical
document, which is the only light in which I wish it to be considered
here, as well, indeed, as all works of a similar nature that I may think
it necessary to quote. I have written in France and other countries,
under different laws and circumstances, and I have always found the
liberty of the press existing for me.

I hope to experience its influence on the present occasion, although my
subject is one of a most delicate nature. I now look forward to the
speedy termination of my voyage; the port is within sight, and I hope to
reach it safely, in spite of all the shoals I may encounter.

              MY DOMESTIC AFFAIRS.—THE EMPEROR’S VIEWS IN
                            HIS MUNIFICENCE.

9th—10th. The Emperor passed a bad night. He desired me to be called
early in the morning. When I went to him, he told me that he was half
dead, that he had had no rest, and was feverish. He has continued very
ill for these two days, and has reclined almost constantly on his couch,
which in the evenings is drawn near the fire. He has been unable to eat,
and has drunk nothing but warm lemonade. I have been in continual
attendance on him during these two days; he has enjoyed a little sleep
at intervals, and the rest of the time he has spent in conversing with
me upon various subjects. He spoke of the expense of giving parties in
Paris; and, passing from that subject to my domestic affairs, he
expressed a wish that I should make him acquainted with the minutest
details on that point.

I told him that my income had amounted only to 20,000 francs a year,
15,000 of which were derived from my own property, and 5000 from my
salary as a Councillor of State. On hearing this he exclaimed: “You must
have been mad! How could you venture to approach the Tuileries with so
straitened an income? The expenses of attending the Court were
enormous!”—“Sire,” I replied, “I contrived to keep up my dignity as well
as the rest: and yet I never solicited any thing from your Majesty.” The
Emperor observed, “I do not say you did; but you must have been ruined
in less than four or five years.”—“No, Sire,” I rejoined, “I had been an
emigrant during the greater part of my life; I had lived amidst
privations, and, with a few exceptions, I still subjected myself to
them. It is true that, in spite of all my economy, I ran through 7 or
8000 francs of my capital every year. But I calculated thus: it was well
known that every person about you must, by dint of zeal and attention to
their duties, sooner or later, attract your notice, and that he who once
gained your favour might consider his fortune made. I had still four or
five years left to try this chance; at the expiration of which, if
fortune did not smile on me, I was determined to renounce the illusions
of the world, and to retire from the capital with an income of ten or
twelve thousand livres; poor enough, to be sure, but, nevertheless,
richer than ever I had been in Paris.”—“Well,” said the Emperor, “your
scheme was not a bad one, and the moment had just arrived when you would
have been indemnified for all your losses. I was just about to do
something for you, and it was wholly your own fault that you did not
make a more rapid and brilliant fortune. I believe I have told you
before that you did not know how to avail yourself of favourable
opportunities for securing your own advancement.”

This conversation led us to speak of the enormous sums which the Emperor
had lavished on the persons about him, and, gradually becoming animated,
he said:—“It would be difficult to estimate all that I bestowed in this
way. I might, on more than one occasion, have been accused of profusion,
and I am grieved to see that it has been of little use in any respect.
There must certainly have been some fatality on my part, or some
essential fault in the persons whom I favoured. What a difficulty was I
placed in! It cannot be believed that my extravagance was caused by
personal vanity. To act the part of an Asiatic monarch was not a thing
to my taste. I was not actuated either by vanity or caprice; every thing
was with me a matter of calculation. Though certain persons might be
favourites with me, yet I did not lavish my bounty on them merely
because I liked them: I wished to found, through them, great families,
who might form rallying-points in great national crises. The great
Officers of my Household, as well as all my Ministers, independently of
their enormous salaries, often received from me handsome
gratuities,—sometimes complete services of plate, &c. What was my object
in this profuseness? I required that they should maintain elegant
establishments, give grand dinners and brilliant balls!—And why did I
wish this? In order to amalgamate parties, to form new unions, to smooth
down old asperities, and to give a character to French society and
manners. If I conceived good ideas, they miscarried in the execution:
for instance, none of my chief Courtiers ever kept up a suitable
establishment. If they gave dinners, they invited only their party
friends; and when I attended their expensive balls, whom did I find
there? All the Court of the Tuileries: not a new face; not one of those
who were offended at the new system—those sullen malcontents, whom a
little honey would have brought back to the hive. They could not enter
into my views, or did not wish to do so. In vain I expressed
displeasure, intreated, and commanded: things still went on in the same
way. I could not be every-where at once, and they knew that;—and yet it
was affirmed that I ruled with a rod of iron. How, then, must things go
under gentle sovereigns?”

              REMOVAL OF THE EMPEROR’S BED.—ANECDOTE OF A
                GASCON SOLDIER.—THE GUARDS OF THE EAGLE.

11th.—The Emperor continued unwell. I found him very low-spirited. He
had ordered the situation of his bed to be changed—that bed, so long the
constant companion of his victories, was now a couch of sickness. He
complained that it was too small for him, that he could hardly turn
himself in it; but his chamber would not have afforded room for a longer
one. He ordered the camp-bed to be carried into his cabinet, and placed
beside a couch; so that the two combined formed a bed of tolerable size.
To what an extremity is he reduced! The Emperor stretched himself on his
sofa, and entered into conversation, which revived him a little.
Speaking of his accession to the Consulship, and of the dreadful
disorders which he found existing in all the branches of the public
service, he said that he had been compelled to adopt numerous measures
of reform, which caused a great outcry, but which had not a little
contributed to strengthen the bonds of society. These measures extended
to the army, among the officers, and even among the generals, who, he
said, had become such, Heaven knows how. Here I took the liberty to
relate an anecdote which had at one time afforded great amusement to the
circle in which I moved. One of my friends, (who was as dissatisfied
with the then existing government as I was myself,) travelling in one of
the small Versailles diligences with a soldier of the guard, maliciously
excited him to express his opinions. The man complained that every thing
went wrong, because it was required that a soldier should know how to
read and write before he could be advanced from the ranks. “So you see,”
he exclaimed, “the _tic has returned again_.”[25] This phrase pleased
us, and was often repeated among us. “Well,” observed the Emperor, “what
would your soldier have said when I created the Guards of the Eagle?
That measure would, doubtless, have re-established me in his good
opinion. I appointed two sub-officers to be the special guards of the
Eagle in every regiment, one of whom was placed on either side of the
standard; and, lest their ardour in the midst of the conflict might
cause them to lose sight of the only object which they ought to have in
view, namely, the preservation of the Eagle, they were prohibited from
using the sabre or the sword: their only arms were a few braces of
pistols; their only duty was coolly to blow out the brains of the enemy
who might attempt to lay hands on the Eagle. But, before a man could
obtain this post, he was required to prove that he could neither read
nor write, and of course you guess the reason why.” “No, Sire.” “Why,
simpleton! Every man who has received education is sure to rise in the
army, but the soldier who has not these advantages, never attains
advancement except by dint of courage and extraordinary circumstances.”

Footnote 25:

  TIC is the French term for any bad habit.

As I was in the humour for gossiping, I related another anecdote, which
had also produced merriment in the saloons of Paris. It was said that, a
regiment having lost its Eagle, Napoleon harangued the men on the
subject, and expressed great indignation at the dishonour they had
brought upon themselves by suffering their Eagle to be taken. “But we
tricked the enemy,” exclaimed a Gascon soldier, “they have only got the
staff, for here is the _cuckoo_ in my pocket;” and he produced the
Eagle. The Emperor laughed and said, “Well, I could not venture to
affirm that this circumstance, or something very like it, did not
actually take place. My soldiers were very much at their ease and made
very free with me; often addressing me familiarly by the pronoun
_thou_.”

I mentioned having heard that on the eve of the battle of Jena, or some
other great engagement, as Napoleon was passing a particular station,
accompanied by a very small escort, a soldier refused to let him pass,
and, growing angry when the Emperor insisted on advancing, swore that he
should not pass even though he were the _Little Corporal_ himself. When
the soldier ascertained that it was really the Little Corporal, he was
not at all disconcerted. The Emperor observed, “That was because he felt
the conviction of having done his duty; and indeed the fact is that I
passed for a terrible tyrant in the saloons, and even among the officers
of the army, but not among the soldiers: they possessed the instinct of
truth and sympathy, they knew me to be their protector, and, in case of
need, their avenger.”

                 THE EMPEROR CONTINUES UNWELL.—HORRIBLE
                    PROVISIONS, EXECRABLE WINE, &C.

12th.—To-day the Emperor, although no better than he had been for some
days past, determined, as he said, to nurse himself no longer. He
dressed and repaired to the drawing-room, where he dictated, for two or
three hours, to one of his suite. He had eaten nothing for three days:
he had not yet been relieved by the crisis which he expected, and which
is usually produced by the singular regimen which he prescribes for
himself. He continued drinking warm lemonade. This circumstance led him
to inquire how long a person might live without eating, and how far
drink might supply the place of solid food. He sent for the
_Encyclopedia Britannica_, in which he met with some very curious facts:
for instance, he found that a woman had existed for fifty days without
solid food, and drinking only twice. Another instance was mentioned of a
person who had lived twenty days upon water alone.

Somebody observed, in reference to this subject, that Charles XII., out
of pure contradiction to the opinions of those around him, had abstained
from eating for the space of five or six days, at the expiration of
which, however, he devoured a turkey and a leg of mutton, at the hazard
of bursting. Napoleon laughed at this anecdote, and assured us that he
felt no wish to run to such extremes, however attractive the model might
be in other respects.

The Emperor played a game at piquet with Madame de Montholon. The Grand
Marshal having entered, he left off playing, and asked him how he
thought he looked. Bertrand replied, “Only rather sallow;” which was
indeed the case. The Emperor rose good-humouredly, and pursued Bertrand
into the saloon, in order to catch him by the ear, exclaiming, “Rather
sallow, indeed! Do you intend to insult me. Grand Marshal? Do you mean
to say that I am bilious, morose, atrabilarious, passionate, unjust,
tyrannical! Let me catch hold of your ear, and I will take my revenge.”

The dinner-hour arrived, and the Emperor for some time was undecided
whether he would sit down to table with us, or dine alone in his own
room. He decided upon the latter plan, lest, as he said, he should be
tempted to imitate Charles XII. if he sat at the great table: but he
would have found it difficult to do that. He returned while we were at
dinner, and, from the scanty way in which our table was served, he said
he really pitied us, for in fact we had scarcely any thing to eat. This
circumstance induced the Emperor to resort to a painful extremity: he
instantly gave orders that a portion of his plate should be sold every
month, to supply what was necessary for our table. The worst thing
connected with our wretched dinner was the wine, which had for some days
been execrable, and had made us all unwell. We were obliged to send for
some to the camp, in the hope that that which had been furnished to us
would be changed, as we could not drink it.

In the course of a conversation which took place respecting the wine,
the Emperor stated that he had received a great number of instructions
and directions from chemists and physicians, all of whom had concurred
in declaring that wine and coffee were the two things respecting which
it was most necessary he should be on his guard. Every professional man
had cautioned him to reject both wine and coffee if he found any
unpleasant flavour in them. Wine, in particular, he was advised to
abstain from, if he found any thing _uncommon_ in the taste of it. He
had always been in the habit of getting his wine from Chambertin, and
had therefore, seldom occasion to find fault with it; but the case is
different now, if he had refused wine whenever he found any thing
_uncommon_ in it, he must have abstained from it for a considerable time
past.

                  CRITICISM ON PRINCE LUCIEN’S POEM OF
                          CHARLEMAGNE.—HOMER.

13th.—The weather is very bad; and it has continued so for three weeks
or a month. The Emperor sent for me before one o’clock: he was in his
saloon; our Amphitryon had paid me a visit, and I took him to the
Emperor, who spoke to him on matters of a private and personal nature.

Napoleon is much altered in his looks.—To-day he wished to set to work.
I sent for my son, and he went over the chapters relating to the Pope
and Tagliamento. He continued thus employed until five o’clock. He was
very low-spirited, and appeared to be suffering much; he retired, saying
he would try to eat a little.

Two ships came within sight, one was supposed to be the Eurydice, which
was every moment expected to arrive from Europe, having touched at the
Cape: they proved to be, however, one of the Company’s ships and another
vessel that was accidentally passing the island.

The Emperor came to us while we were at dinner; he said he had eaten
enough for four persons, and that this had quite restored him.

He wanted something to read, and looked over his brother Lucien’s poem
of Charlemagne. He analysed the first canto, and afterwards glanced over
a few others: he then examined the subject and the plan of the work, &c.
“How much labour, ingenuity and time,” he observed, “have been thrown
away upon this book! what a wreck of judgment and taste! Here are twenty
thousand verses, some of which may be good, for aught I know; but they
are destitute of interest, design, or effect. It might have been
regarded as a compulsory task, had it been written by a professed
author. Why did not Lucien, with all his good sense, consider that
Voltaire, master as he was of the French language and the art of poetry,
failed in a similar attempt, though that attempt was made in Paris, in
the midst of the sanctuary! How could Lucien suppose it possible to
write a French poem, when living at a distance from the French capital?
How could he pretend to introduce a new metre? He has written a history
in verse, and not an epic poem. An epic poem should not be the history
of a man, but of a passion or an event. And, then, what a subject has
Lucien chosen! What barbarous names has he introduced! Does he think he
has succeeded in raising the religion which he conceived to be fallen?
Is his poem intended as a work of re-action? It certainly bears the
stamp of the soil on which it was written: it is full of prayers,
priests, the temporal authority of the Popes, &c. How could he think of
devoting twenty thousand lines to absurdities which do not belong to the
present age, to prejudices which he could not enter into, and opinions
which he could not entertain! What a misapplication of talent! He might
undoubtedly have produced something more creditable to himself; for he
possesses judgment, facility, and industry. He was in Rome amidst the
richest materials, and with the means of satisfying the deepest
research. He understands the Italian language: and, as we have no good
history of Italy, he might have written one. His talents, his situation,
his knowledge of affairs, his rank, might have enabled him to produce an
excellent classic work. It would have been a valuable acquisition to the
literary world, and would have conferred honour on its author. But what
is Charlemagne? What reputation will it gain? It will be buried in the
dust of libraries, and its author will obtain at most a few scanty and
perhaps ridiculous notices in biographical dictionaries. If Lucien could
not resist the temptation of scribbling verses, he should have prepared
a splendid manuscript, embellished with elegant designs and superb
binding, with which he might now and then have gratified the eyes of the
ladies, occasionally allowing a few quotations from it to creep into
publicity; and finally he should have left it to his heirs, with a
severe prohibition against committing it to the press. One might then
have been able to understand his taste.”

He laid the work aside, and said: “Let us turn to the Iliad.” My son
went to fetch it, and the Emperor read a few cantos, stopping at various
passages, in order, as he said, to admire them at his ease. His
observations were copious and remarkable. He was so deeply interested in
what he read, that it was half-past twelve before he retired to rest.

            SCARCITY OF PROVISIONS.—RIDICULOUS ALLOWANCE OF
                   WINE.—NAPOLEON’S RETURN FROM ELBA.

14th.—The terrible state of the weather still continued, and confined us
to our miserable huts. We are all indisposed.

The Emperor dictated during part of the day, and he felt himself much
better.

At dinner we had literally scarcely any thing to eat. The Governor
continued his successive reductions. The Emperor ordered some additional
provisions to be purchased and paid for out of the produce of the sale
of his plate.

The Governor intimated that the allowance of wine should continue fixed
at one bottle for each person, the Emperor included. Will it be
credited? _One bottle for a mother and her children!_ these were the
words used in the note.

The Emperor retired to his own apartment, and sent for me to attend him.
“I am not inclined to sleep,” said he, “and I sent for you to help me to
keep my vigil; let us have a little chat together.” The turn of the
conversation led us to speak of the Island of Elba, of the Emperor’s
occupations, sensations, and opinions while he continued there; finally,
his return to France, and the brilliant success which attended him, and
which, he said, he never for a moment doubted. Many observations were
repeated, which I have already noted down at different times. At one
moment he said: “They may explain this as they will: but I assure you, I
never entertained any direct or personal hatred of those whose power I
subverted. To me it was merely a political contest: I was astonished
myself to find my heart free from animosity, and, I may add, animated by
good will towards my enemies. You saw how I released the Duke
d’Angoulême; and I would have done the same by the King, and even have
granted him an asylum of his own choosing. The triumph of the cause in
no way depended on his person, and I respected his age and his
misfortunes. Perhaps also I felt grateful for a certain degree of
consideration which he in particular had observed towards me. It is true
that, at the moment to which I am now alluding, he had, I believe,
outlawed me and set a price upon my head; but I looked upon all this as
belonging to the _manifesto style_. The same kind of denunciations were
also issued by the Austrian government, without, however, giving me much
uneasiness; though I must confess that my dear father-in-law was rather
too hard with the husband of his beloved daughter.”

Since I have once more had occasion to mention the Emperor’s return from
the Island of Elba, this is, perhaps, the proper place to fulfil the
promise I have made of giving a narrative of the circumstances connected
with that extraordinary event. I here combine together the statements
that fell from him at different times.

Napoleon was residing at the Island of Elba, on the faith of treaties,
when he learned that at the Congress of Vienna some idea was entertained
of transporting him from Europe. None of the articles of the treaty of
Fontainebleau were fulfilled. The public papers informed him of the
state of feeling in France, and he accordingly formed his determination.
He kept the secret until the last moment;[26] and, under one pretence or
another, means were found for making the requisite preparations. It was
not until they were all on board that the troops first conceived a
suspicion of the Emperor’s purpose: a thousand or twelve hundred men had
set sail to regain possession of an empire containing a population of
thirty millions!

Footnote 26:

  I must take this opportunity of correcting an error which has
  occasioned considerable pain to an individual whom I greatly esteem.
  In a former part of this Journal it is mentioned that, _eight days_
  before the Emperor quitted Elba, General Drouot communicated his
  intentions to the Princess Borghesse, &c. General Drouot, however,
  affirms that he was not honoured with the Emperor’s confidence until
  the _very last moment_, and that consequently he could not have
  divulged the secret at the time alluded to. General Drouot must of all
  others be the best informed, as well as most interested, with regard
  to these facts: for my own part I have only to observe, that, in this
  instance, I merely noted down a current report, which was repeated
  without any ill design, and which had never been contradicted.

There were nearly five or six hundred men on board the brig in which
Napoleon embarked; this was, he said, the crew of a seventy-four. They
fell in with a French brig of war, which they spoke. It was asserted
that the captain of the French brig recognised them, and at parting
cried out three times, “A good voyage to you!” At all events, the
officer who commanded the Emperor’s vessel, proposed to pursue and
capture the brig. The Emperor rejected the idea as absurd; such a
proceeding could only have been excusable, had necessity demanded it.
“Why,” said he, “should I introduce this new incident into my plan? What
advantage should I derive from its success? To what risks would its
failure expose me!”

After the check they experienced on landing, by the capture of twenty
men who had been sent to summon Antibes, a variety of opinions was
advanced, and urged with some warmth. Some proposed that they should
make immediately an attack and carry Antibes, in order to obviate the
evil consequences which might ensue from the resistance of that place
and the imprisonment of the twenty men. The Emperor replied that the
taking of Antibes would be no step towards the conquest of France; that,
during the brief interval that would be occupied in the execution of
that project, a general alarm would be raised throughout the country;
and that obstacles would be opposed to them in the only course which it
was expedient they should pursue. He added that time was valuable; and
that the ill consequences of the affair of Antibes might be effectually
obviated by marching forward with sufficient speed to anticipate the
news. An officer of the guard indirectly hinted that it was not right
thus to abandon the twenty men who had been made prisoners; but the
Emperor merely observed that he had formed a poor idea of the magnitude
of the enterprise; that, if half of his followers were in the same
situation, he would not scruple to abandon them in the same manner; and
that if they were all made prisoners, he would march forward alone.[27]

Footnote 27:

  It must not, however, be supposed that he shewed any unfeeling
  disregard of these men; for he directed the war commissioner, Charles
  Vautier, who was with him, to repair with all haste to Antibes, and to
  release the prisoners by attempting to take the garrison. When Vautier
  set out, he several times called after him: “Take care you do not get
  yourself made prisoner too.”

A few hours before nightfall he landed at the gulf of Juan, where he
bivouacked. Soon after, a postilion in splendid livery was conducted to
him. It turned out that this man had formerly been in the Imperial
household. He had been a domestic of the Empress Josephine’s, and was
now in the service of the Prince of Monaco, who himself had been equerry
to the Empress. The postilion, on being questioned by the Emperor,
informed him, after expressing his great astonishment at finding him
there, that he had just come from Paris, and that he was sure he would
every where be joyfully greeted. He affirmed that all along the road, as
far as Avignon, he had heard nothing but regret for the Emperor’s
absence; that his name was publicly in every mouth, and that, when once
fairly through Provence, he would find the whole population ready to
rally round him. The man added, that his splendid livery had frequently
rendered him the object of odium and insult. This was the testimony of
one of the common class of society: it was very gratifying to the
Emperor, and entirely corresponded with his expectations. The Prince of
Monaco himself, on being presented to Napoleon, was less explicit.
Napoleon refrained from questioning him on political matters: there were
persons present, and he did not wish to incur the risk of eliciting any
detail which might create unfavourable impressions on those about him.
The conversation therefore assumed a lively character, and turned
entirely on the ladies of the Imperial court of the Tuileries,
concerning whom Napoleon made the minutest inquiries.

As soon as the moon had risen, which was about one or two o’clock in the
morning, the bivouack broke up, and Napoleon gave orders for proceeding
to Grasse. There he expected to find a road which he had ordered during
the Empire. However, the design had not been executed, and he was
reduced to the necessity of passing through narrow defiles filled with
snow. He therefore left behind him, in the charge of the municipality of
Grasse, his carriage and two pieces of cannon, which had been brought
ashore: this was termed a capture in the bulletins of the time.

The municipality of Grasse was devoted to the royalist party; but the
sudden appearance of the Emperor afforded little time for hesitation,
and they came to make their submission to him. The Emperor, having
passed through the town, halted on a little height at some distance
beyond it, where he breakfasted. He was soon surrounded by the whole
population of the town: and went through this multitude as though he had
been in the midst of his Court circle at the Tuileries. He heard the
same sentiments and the same prayers as before he quitted France. One
complained of not having received his pension, another solicited an
addition to his allowance, a third represented that his cross of the
legion of honour had been withheld from him, a fourth prayed for
promotion, &c. A number of petitions had already been drawn up and were
presented to him, just as though he had come from Paris, and was making
a tour through the departments.

Some enthusiastic patriots, who were well acquainted with the state of
affairs, secretly informed Napoleon that the authorities of the place
were very hostile, but that the mass of the people were devoted to him,
and that they only waited until his back should be turned, in order to
rid themselves of the miscreants. “Be not too hasty,” said the Emperor.
“Let them have the mortification of seeing our triumph, without having
any thing to reproach us with. Be tranquil and prudent.”

The Emperor advanced with the rapidity of lightning. “Victory,” said he,
“depended on my speed. To me France was in Grenoble. This place was an
hundred leagues distant, but I and my companions reached it in five
days,[28] and by what roads and what weather! I entered the city just as
the Count d’Artois, warned by the telegraph, was quitting the
Tuileries.”

Footnote 28:

  March 1st. The Emperor landed at Cannes, at the Gulf of Juan.

  2d. Entered Grasse.

  3d. Slept at Barême.

  4th. Dined at Digne, and slept at Maligeai.

  5th. Slept at Gap.

  6th. Slept at Corps, and a little beyond the town on the following
  day, the Emperor harangued and rallied the troops of the 5th. A few
  hours afterwards he was joined by Labédoyère, at the head of the 7th.

  7th. Arrived at Grenoble and halted.

  9th. Slept at Bourgouin.

  10th. Reached Lyons, where he remained three days.

  13th. Slept at Macon. Ney’s famous proclamation issued.

  14th. Slept at Chalons.

  15th. Slept at Autun.

  16th. At Avalon.

  17th. At Auxeres, where he remained for a day, and was joined by the
  Prince of the Moskowa.

  20th. Arrived at Fontainebleau, at four in the morning, and entered
  the Tuileries at nine in the evening.

Napoleon himself was so perfectly convinced of the state of affairs, and
of popular sentiment, that he knew his success in no way depended on the
force which he might bring with him. A piquet of gendarmerie, he said,
was all that was necessary. Every thing turned out as he had calculated:
“Victory advanced _au pas de charge_, and the national Eagle flew from
steeple to steeple, till at length it perched on the towers of Notre
Dame.” The Emperor, however, admitted that at first he was not without
some degree of alarm and uncertainty. As he advanced, it is true, the
whole population enthusiastically declared themselves in his favour; but
he saw no soldiers: they were all carefully removed from the places
through which he passed. It was not until he was between Mure and
Vizille, within five or six leagues of Grenoble, and on the fifth day
after his embarkation, that he met the first battalion. The commanding
officer refused even to parley. The Emperor, without hesitation,
advanced alone, and one hundred of his grenadiers marched at some
distance from him, with their arms reversed. The sight of Napoleon, his
costume, and in particular his grey military great coat, produced a
magical effect on the soldiers, and they stood motionless. Napoleon went
straight up to a veteran, whose arm was covered with _chevrons_, and
very unceremoniously seizing him by the whisker, asked him whether he
would have the heart to kill his Emperor. The soldier, his eyes
moistened with tears, immediately thrust the ramrod into his musquet, to
shew that it was not loaded, and exclaimed, “See, I could not have done
thee any harm: all the others are the same.” Cries of _Vive l’Empereur!_
resounded on every side. Napoleon ordered the battalion to make half a
turn to the right, and all marched on to Paris.

At a little distance from Grenoble, Colonel Labédoyère, at the head of
his regiment, came to join the Emperor. The impulse was then confirmed,
and the question was nearly decided.

The peasantry of Dauphiny lined the road-sides: they were transported
and mad with joy. The first battalion, which has just been alluded to,
still shewed some signs of hesitation; but thousands crowded on its
rear, and by their shouts of _Vive l’Empereur!_ endeavoured to urge the
troops to decision; while others, who were in Napoleon’s rear, excited
his little troop to advance, declaring that no harm whatever would be
done to it.

In a valley through which they passed, a very affecting spectacle
presented itself: many communes were assembled together, accompanied by
their mayors and curates. Amidst the multitude was observed a handsome
young man, a grenadier of the Guard, who had been missing since the time
of Napoleon’s landing, and whose disappearance had given rise to
suspicion. He now advanced and threw himself at the Emperor’s feet: the
tears glistened in his eyes, and he supported in his arms an old man of
ninety, whom he presented to the Emperor:—this was his father, in quest
of whom he had set off as soon as he landed in France. The Emperor,
after his arrival at the Tuileries, ordered a picture of this
circumstance to be painted.

It was night when Napoleon arrived before the walls of Grenoble: his
promptitude defeated all the measures that were to have been taken to
oppose him. There was no time to cut down the bridges, nor even to put
the troops in motion. He found the gates of the city closed, and the
colonel commanding the fortress refused to open them. “A peculiar
circumstance attending this extraordinary revolution,” said the Emperor,
“was that the soldiers were not deficient, to a certain degree, in
discipline and obedience to their commanding officers: their only
resistance was by inert force, of which they availed themselves as of a
right.” Thus the first battalion performed all the movements that were
ordered, retired and refused to communicate; but the men did not load
their guns, and they would not have fired. When Napoleon arrived before
Grenoble, the whole garrison, assembled on the ramparts, shouted _Vive
l’Empereur!_ They shook hands with Napoleon’s followers, through the
wickets; but they would not open the gates, because the commander had
forbidden them to do so. The Emperor found it necessary to force the
gates; and this was done under the mouths of ten pieces of artillery on
the ramparts, loaded with grape-shot. To complete this union of singular
circumstances, the commander of the first battalion and the colonel, who
had so openly opposed the Emperor, when asked by him whether he could
depend on them, replied that he could;—that their troops had deserted
them, but that they would never desert their troops; and that, since the
men had declared themselves for Napoleon, they also would be faithful to
him. The Emperor retained these officers in his service.

In none of his battles did Napoleon ever imagine himself to be in so
much danger as at his entrance into Grenoble. The soldiers seemed to
turn upon him with furious gestures; for a moment it might have been
supposed that they were about to tear him in pieces. But these were
merely transports of love and joy. The Emperor and his horse were both
borne along by the multitude; and he had scarcely time to breathe in the
inn where he alighted, when an increased tumult was heard in the
streets: the inhabitants of Grenoble came to offer him the gates of the
city, since they could not present him with the keys.

“Being once established in Grenoble,” said the Emperor, “and having
attained a positive power, I could have maintained hostilities had it
been necessary to do so.”

Napoleon, at this time, very much regretted not having got his
proclamations printed at the Island of Elba; but of course this could
not have been done without the risk of promulgating his secret designs.
He dictated his proclamations on board the brig, where every man who
could write was employed in copying them. It was found necessary to
transcribe them over again during the Emperor’s march to Paris, that
they might be circulated on the road, so eager was the demand for them.
They were then very scarce, often incorrect and even illegible; and yet
the necessity of promulgating them was felt at every step, for wherever
they were read they produced an immediate and powerful sensation. The
events of the last twenty years have contributed in a high degree to
enlighten the mass of the people, for, notwithstanding the joy they felt
at the Emperor’s return, they eagerly enquired what was his object. All
were satisfied with the national sentiments contained in the
proclamations; and the utmost joy was evinced when it was understood
that Napoleon had brought no foreign troops with him. His advance had
been so rapid and his movements so unexpected, that a thousand reports
had been circulated respecting the amount and nature of his forces. It
was said that he was accompanied by Neapolitans, Austrians, and even
Turks.

From Grenoble to Paris, Napoleon may be said to have made a triumphal
march. During the four days of his stay at Lyons, there were continually
upwards of twenty thousand persons assembled before his windows, and
their acclamations were incessant. It would never have been supposed
that the Emperor had for a moment been separated from his subjects. He
signed decrees, issued orders, reviewed troops, &c.; all military corps,
all public bodies, all classes of the citizens, eagerly came forward to
offer him their homage and demonstrate their attachment. Even the
national horse guards, a corps composed of men who had shewn themselves
most ardent in the Royalist cause, solicited the honour of forming his
escort; but these were the only persons whom the Emperor treated with
coldness. “Gentlemen,” said he, “I thank you for this offer of your
services; but your conduct towards the Count d’Artois sufficiently
proves how you would act by me, were fortune to forsake me. I will not
subject you to this new trial.” On quitting Lyons, the Count d’Artois,
it is said, found only one of the guards willing to follow him to Paris.
The Emperor, whose heart was so keenly alive to every generous
sentiment, on hearing of the fidelity of this volunteer, ordered the
decoration of the legion of honour to be presented to him.

At Lyons, Napoleon issued orders, through the medium of proclamations,
with all that precision, firmness, and confidence, which usually attend
established and uninterrupted power. His conduct indicated no trace of
the terrible reverses he had so lately sustained, or the great risks he
had yet to encounter. If it were possible to mention every circumstance,
that took place, I could relate a very pleasant private anecdote
indicative of the calmness of mind evinced by Napoleon, during the great
crisis which was about to change the face of France and to rouse all
Europe.

As soon as the Emperor quitted Lyons, he wrote to inform Ney, who, with
his army, was at Lons-le-Saunier, that he must immediately march with
his forces to join him. Ney, amidst the general confusion, abandoned by
his troops, confounded by the Emperor’s proclamations, the addresses of
Dauphiny, and the defection of the garrison of Lyons, overpowered by the
enthusiasm of the people of the surrounding provinces—Ney, the child of
the Revolution, yielded to the general impulse, and issued his famous
order of the day. But the recollection of the events of Fontainebleau
induced him to write to the Emperor, informing him that, in his recent
conduct he had been guided principally by a view to the interests of his
country; and that, convinced he must have forfeited all claim to
Napoleon’s confidence, he solicited permission to retire from the
service. The Emperor again wrote, desiring that he would immediately
come and join him, and that he would receive him as he had done the day
after the battle of the Moscowa. Ney, on presenting himself before the
Emperor, was much embarrassed; and repeated that, if he had lost his
confidence, he asked for nothing but to be reduced to the rank of one of
his grenadiers. “Certainly,” said the Emperor, “he had behaved very ill
to me; but how could I forget his brilliant courage, and the many acts
of heroism that had distinguished his past life! I rushed forward to
embrace him, calling him the ‘_bravest of the brave_’—and from that
moment we were reconciled.”

The Emperor went nearly post haste all the way from Lyons to Paris. He
no where experienced opposition, and no fighting took place. Literally
his presence produced merely a theatrical change of scene. His advanced
guard was composed of the troops which happened to be before him on the
road, and to which couriers were sent forward. Thus Napoleon entered
Paris, escorted by the very troops who in the morning had been sent out
to oppose him. A regiment posted at Montereau spontaneously crossed the
bridge, repaired to Melun, and charged a party of the body guards who
were stationed at the latter place: this circumstance, it is said,
occasioned the sudden departure of the Royal family.

The Emperor frequently told us that, if he had chosen, he might have
brought with him to Paris two millions of peasants. On his approach the
people every where rose in a mass; and he often repeats that there were
no conspirators excepting opinion.

On the day after Napoleon’s arrival at the Tuileries, some one having
remarked to him that his life was a succession of prodigies, but that
the last surpassed all the rest, I heard him say in reply, that his only
merit, in this instance, consisted in having formed a just opinion of
the state of affairs in France, and in having been able to penetrate
into the hearts of Frenchmen. At another time he said to us, when
conversing on this subject: “If I except Labédoyère, who flew to me with
enthusiasm and affection, and another individual who freely rendered me
important services, nearly all the other generals whom I met on my route
evinced hesitation and uncertainty: they yielded only to the impulse of
their troops, if indeed they did not manifest a hostile feeling towards
me.

“It is now clear to every one,” said he, “that Ney quitted Paris quite
devoted to the King, and that if he turned against him a few days
afterwards, it was because he thought he could not do otherwise.

“I was so far from relying at all on Massena that, on my landing in
France, I felt it necessary to get past him with all speed; and on my
asking him some time after, at Paris, how he would have acted, had I not
left Provence so precipitately as I did, he was frank enough to reply
that he should feel some embarrassment in answering me; but that the
course I had pursued was, at all events, the safest, and the best.

“Saint-Cyr found himself in danger by attempting to restrain the
soldiers under his command.

“Soult confessed to me that he had conceived a sincere regard for the
King, so much did he admire his government; and he would not return to
my service until after the _Champ de Mai_.

“Macdonald never made his appearance, and the Duke of Belluno followed
the King to Ghent. Thus,” said he, “if the Bourbons have reason to
complain of the complete desertion of the soldiers and the people, they
certainly have no right to reproach with infidelity the chiefs of the
army, those pupils or even leaders of the Revolution, who, in spite of
twenty-five years’ experience, proved themselves, in this instance, mere
children in politics. They could neither be looked upon as emigrants nor
patriots!”

Napoleon seemed instinctively attached to his grand principle of acting
only on masses and by masses. Both at the commencement of the
enterprise, and after his landing in France, he was repeatedly urged to
treat with some of the authorities, but he constantly returned the same
excellent answer: “If I still hold a place in the hearts of the people,
I need concern myself but little about persons in authority, and if I
could only rely on the latter, what service could they render me in
opposing the great mass?”

The following fact will shew how little communication Napoleon had
maintained with the capital. On the morning of his entry into Paris,
after his return from the Isle of Elba, a hundred and fifty half-pay
officers quitted St. Denis, where they had been stationed by the
Princes, and marched to the capital, bringing with them four pieces of
artillery. They were met on the road by some generals, who placed
themselves at their head; and the little troop thus proceeded to the
palace of the Tuileries, where they assembled together the heads of the
different departments of the ministry, who all agreed to act in the name
of the Emperor. Thus Paris was tranquilly governed that day by the
torrent of opinion and the transport of private affections. None of the
great partisans of the Emperor, none of his former ministers, having
received any communication from him, dared sign an order, or assume any
responsibility. The public papers would not have appeared next day but
for the zeal of private individuals, who, spontaneously and without
authority, filled them with expressions of the feelings by which they
were animated, and with the statements of passing events. In the same
manner Lavalette took possession of the post-office. Paris was that day
without police and without government, and yet never did greater
tranquillity prevail in the capital.

The Emperor entered the Tuileries about nine o’clock in the evening,
with an escort of a hundred horse, just as if he had come from one of
his country residences. On alighting, he was almost squeezed to death by
a crowd of military officers and citizens, who thronged around him, and
fairly carried him in their arms into his saloon. Here he found dinner
ready, and he was just sitting down to table, when the officer who had
been despatched in the morning to Vincennes to summon the fortress,
arrived. He brought intelligence of the capitulation of the commandant,
whose only conditions were, that he should receive a passport for
himself and his family.

It is a very singular circumstance that, on the morning after the
Emperor’s arrival at the Tuileries, while a messenger had gone out to
procure a tri-coloured flag, one was found at the pavilion Marsan,
during the search that was made, as a matter of prudence, through the
palace. This flag was immediately hoisted. It was quite new, and larger
than the usual size. No one could guess how it had got into the
Tuileries, and for what purpose it had been intended.

In fact, the more light there is thrown on the subject, the more evident
it must be that there was no other conspiracy than that of the nature of
things. Party-spirit alone can seek in the present age to raise a doubt
on this point; history will have none.

[Illustration:

  THE RETURN FROM ELBA.

  London: Published for HENRY COLBURN, December, 1835.
]

A few days after Napoleon’s removal to Longwood, his return from Elba
became the subject of conversation among the officers who were presented
to him, when one of them observed that that astonishing event presented
to the eyes of Europe the contrast of all that was most feeble and most
sublime, the Bourbons abandoning a monarchy, and flying on the approach
of a single man, who by his own individual efforts boldly undertook the
conquest of an empire. “Sir,” said the Emperor, “are mistaken, you have
taken a wrong view of the matter. The Bourbons were not wanting in
courage; they did all they could. The Count d’Artois flew to Lyons; the
Duchess d’Angoulême proved herself an amazon in Bourdeaux, and the Duke
d’Angoulême offered as much resistance as he could. If, in spite of all
this, they could attain no satisfactory object, the fault must not be
attributed to them, but to the force of circumstances. The Bourbons,
individually, could do no more than they really did; the contagion had
spread in every direction.”

             POEM OF CHARLEMAGNE.—THE BROTHERS AND SISTERS
                OF THE EMPEROR WHO HAVE BECOME AUTHORS.

15th.—To-day the Emperor took advantage of a short, interval of fine
weather to walk to the Company’s garden. I was alone with him, I made
certain representations to him, after which, I ventured to suggest some
ideas, but he rejected them as absurd. “Go, my dear Las Cases,” said he;
“you are a _simpleton_. But be not offended at the epithet,” he added,
“I do not apply it to every one; with me it is nearly synonymous with an
honest man.”

After dinner, the Emperor attempted to read a part of the poem of
Charlemagne, which he had taken up yesterday evening, and again laid
aside. This evening, like the two preceding, was divided between
Charlemagne and Homer. The latter the Emperor said he read for the sake
of recruiting his spirits, and he again resumed his censure of Prince
Lucien, and his admiration of Homer.

Some one present informed the Emperor that Lucien had ready for the
press another poem, similar to his Charlemagne, to be entitled “Charles
Martel in Corsica.” It was added that he had likewise written a dozen
tragedies. “Why, the devil’s in him,” exclaimed the Emperor.

He was then informed that his brother Louis was the author of a novel.
“His work may possess spirit and grace,” said he, “but it will not be
without a mixture of sentimental metaphysics, and philosophic
absurdity.”

It was mentioned that Princess Eliza had likewise written a novel, and
that even Princess Pauline had produced something in literature. “Yes,”
said the Emperor, “as a heroine perhaps, but not as an authoress. At
that rate,” continued he “all my brothers and sisters must be authors,
except Caroline. The latter, indeed, in her childhood was regarded as
the fool and the Cinderella of the family; but she grew up to be a very
beautiful and a very clever woman.”

         WANT OF PROVISIONS.—GAY SOPHISTRY.—ON IMPOSSIBILITIES.

16th.—In the morning, my servant came to tell me that there was neither
coffee, sugar, milk, nor bread, for breakfast. Yesterday, some hours
before dinner, feeling hungry, I asked for a mouthful of bread, and was
told that there was none for me. Thus we are denied the very necessaries
of life. This fact will scarcely be credited, and yet I have stated
nothing but the truth.

The weather has now become fine. For some time the Emperor has been
unable to walk out; but to-day he went into the garden, and he
afterwards ordered the calash, with the intention of taking his usual
drive, which had been so long suspended. As we were walking about,
Madame de Montholon drove away a dog that had come near her.—“You do not
like dogs, Madam?” said the Emperor,—“No, Sire.”—“If you do not like
dogs, you do not like fidelity; you do not like those who are attached
to you; and, therefore, you are not faithful.”—“But ... but....” said
she—“But ... but....” repeated the Emperor, “where is the error of my
logic? Refute my arguments if you can!”

One of the suite having a few days ago proposed making some chemical
experiments, the Emperor enquired whether he had been successful. The
other complained of not having the necessary apparatus. “A true child of
the Seine,” said Napoleon, “an absolute Parisian cockney! Do you think
you are still at the Tuileries? True industry does not consist in
executing by known and given means; the proof of art and genius is to
accomplish an object in spite of difficulties, and to find little or no
_impossibility_. But what do you complain of? The want of a pestle, when
the bar of any chair might answer your purpose? The want of a mortar?
Any thing is a mortar that you choose to convert to that use; this table
is a mortar; any pot or kettle is a mortar. Do you think you are still
in the Rue Saint-Honoré, amidst all the shops in Paris?”

The Grand Marshal here remarked that this circumstance reminded him of
something that had occurred the first time he had the honour of being
presented to Napoleon, and of the first words he had received from him.
When Bertrand was about to leave the army of Italy, to proceed on a
mission to Constantinople, the young General, perceiving that he was an
officer of engineers, gave him a commission relative to that department.
“On my return,” said Bertrand, “I came up with you at a short distance
from head quarters, and I informed you that I had found the thing
impossible. On this your Majesty, whom I had addressed with great
diffidence, said with the most familiar air—‘But let us see how you set
to work, Sir: that which you found impossible may not be so to me.’
Accordingly,” continued Bertrand, “when I mentioned the means by which I
had proposed to execute what your Majesty wished, you immediately
substituted others. In a few moments I was perfectly convinced of the
superiority of your Majesty’s plans; and this circumstance furnished me
with sentiments and recollections which have since proved very useful to
me.”

The Emperor retired to rest early. We observed that he is very much
altered in his looks, particularly since his last illness. He grows very
weak, and feels fatigued after two turns round the garden.

               STATISTICAL CALCULATION.—POPULATION OF THE
                          ISRAELITES IN EGYPT.

17th—18th. The fine weather has now completely set in. The Emperor went
into the garden, attended by all his suite. After walking about for a
short time, he proceeded to the wood.

On his return from his walk, we all breakfasted together under the tent;
and, the weather being very favourable, the Emperor expressed his wish
to take a drive in the calash.

About five o’clock, he desired me to attend him in his closet, to assist
in searching for some documents on the interior of Africa, bordering
upon Egypt. This is a point on which he has been engaged for some days
past, as he intends to make it the subject of some chapters in his
Campaign of Egypt.

He complained of being unwell, and desired me to order some tea for him.
This was something extraordinary. The Grand Marshal soon after came to
take my place in writing from his dictation.

After dinner, the Emperor was engaged with the pen in his hand, in
investigating the comparative production of the soils of Egypt and
France. He found the production of France to be greatly inferior to that
of Egypt. This calculation was made from Peuchet’s “Statistical Surveys
of France.” The Emperor was satisfied with the result at which he had
arrived; it corresponded with the opinion he had previously formed. This
naturally gave rise to the consideration of several other subjects; for
instance, what was the probable and possible population of Egypt in
ancient times?—what might have been the population of the Israelites,
if, during the short period that they remained in captivity, they had
increased to the degree mentioned in Scripture? &c. The Emperor desired
me to present to him next day something on this latter subject. A great
deal was said on the probabilities of human life, the tables of which
were also found in Peuchet’s work; and on this subject the Emperor made
some very ingenious, novel, and striking remarks.

I presented to the Emperor the calculation I had made on the problem
which he had given to me the preceding day. The result surprised him not
a little; and it furnished a subject for considerable discussion. The
following is the substance of what I presented to him.

The Israelites remained two hundred years in Egypt, during which time we
may calculate ten generations. They married early, and their marriages
were very fruitful. I supposed the children of Jacob, the twelve chiefs
of tribes, to be all married; I also supposed each of them to have had
the same number of children, or six couples, and so on in succession.
The tenth generation would then have amounted to 2,480,064,704 persons.
But the ninth generation and even the eighth was still in existence.
Hence what an awful number of figures. At any rate, let an ample
deduction be made from the number of children, for the mortality
occasioned by accidents, disease, &c., and still it is very certain that
no calculation can be brought forward to contradict the account of
Moses. The Emperor amused himself for a considerable time in detecting
and shewing the errors of my reasoning.

During dinner, he exercised himself in English, by asking my son
questions in that language, in history and geometry. After dinner the
Emperor took up the Odyssey, the reading of which afforded a treat to us
all.

               THE EMPEROR ALTERS VISIBLY, AND LOSES HIS
                      STRENGTH.—SALE OF HIS PLATE.

19th.—Napoleon spent the morning in collecting information on the
sources of the Nile, from the works of several modern authors, Bruce,
&c.... I assisted him in this labour. At three o’clock, he dressed and
went out. The weather was tolerably fine. He ordered the calash, and
then went into the wood on foot, and we walked till we came within sight
of the Signal Hill. He conversed with me on our moral position, and the
vexations which even circumstances arising from our intimacy with him
could not fail to cause him. The calash came up with us, and Monsieur
and Madame Montholon were in it. The Emperor was very glad of this, as
he said he did not feel strong enough to walk back to the house. He
evidently grows feeble, his step becomes heavy and lagging, and his
features alter. His resemblance to his brother Joseph is now striking;
so much so, that, on going to meet him the other day in the garden, I
could have sworn it was Joseph, until the very moment when I came close
to him. Others have remarked the likeness, as well as myself; and we
have often said, that, if we believed in the _second sight_ of the
Scotch Highlanders, we should be inclined to expect that something
extraordinary would happen to Joseph or to the Emperor.

On our return, the Emperor examined a large basket full of broken plate,
which was to be sent next day to the town. This was to be for the future
the indispensable complement for our monthly subsistence, in consequence
of the late retrenchments of the Governor.

We knew that captains in the East India Company’s service had offered as
much as a hundred guineas for a single plate. This circumstance induced
the Emperor to order the arms to be erased and the pieces to be broken,
so as to leave no trace of the plate having belonged to him. All the
dish covers were topped with small massive eagles; these were the only
things he wished to save, and he had them put by. These last fragments
were the objects of the wishes of every one of us; we looked upon them
as relics. There was something religious, and at the same time mournful,
in this feeling.

When the moment came for breaking up this plate, it had produced a most
painful emotion and real grief amongst the servants. They could not
without the greatest reluctance, bring themselves to apply the hammer to
these objects of their veneration. This act upset all their ideas; it
was to them a sacrilege, a desolation. Some of them shed tears on the
occasion. After dinner, the Emperor continued the Odyssey, and
afterwards read some passages of Esmenard’s poem, “La Navigation,” which
he was pleased with.

              FRESH VEXATION FROM THE GOVERNOR.—TOPOGRAPHY
                               OF ITALY.

20th.—The Emperor sent to wake me before eight o’clock, desiring that I
should join him with the calash in the wood, where he was already
walking with M. de Montholon, conversing about the household expenses of
the establishment. The weather had at last become fine once more, it was
like a delightful spring morning. We took two turns.

We have experienced to-day a fresh and inconceivable vexation from the
Governor. He has forbidden us to sell our plate, when broken up, to any
other person than the one he should appoint. What can have been his
intention in committing this new act of injustice? To make himself more
obnoxious, and to give another instance of the abuse of authority.

The Emperor breakfasted under the tent; immediately afterwards, he
dictated the account of the Battle of Marengo to General Gourgaud. He
bade me remain with them and listen. About twelve o’clock he retired to
his apartment to endeavour to rest himself.

Towards three o’clock, the Emperor came into my room again. He found my
son and myself engaged in comparing and looking over the account of the
Battle of Arcole. He knew that it was my favourite chapter, and that I
called it a canto of the Iliad. He wished to read it again, and
expressed himself also pleased with it.

The perusal of this account of Arcole awakened the Emperor’s ideas
respecting what he called “that beautiful theatre, Italy.” He ordered us
to follow him into the drawing-room, where he dictated to us for several
hours. He had caused his immense map of Italy, which covered the
greatest part of the drawing-room, to be spread open on the floor, and
having laid himself down upon it, he went over it on his hands and his
knees, with a compass and a red pencil in his hand, comparing and
measuring the distance with a long piece of string, of which one of us
held one of the ends. “It is thus,” said he to me, laughing at the
posture in which I saw him, “that a country should be measured in order
to form a correct idea of it, and lay down a good plan of a campaign.”

THE CELEBRATED BILLS OF ST. DOMINGO.—INSPECTORS OF THE REVIEWS,
  &C.—PLANS OF ADMINISTRATION, &C.—GAUDIN, MOLLIEN, DEFERMONT, LACUEE,
  &C.—MINISTER OF THE TREASURY.—MINISTER SECRETARY OF STATE.—IMPORTANCE
  OF THEIR FUNCTIONS.

21st.—Admiral Malcolm called upon me to-day. He came to take leave of us
all; he was to sail the next day for the Cape, and would be two months
absent.

We are sorry to lose the Admiral; his manners, always polite, and a kind
of tacit sympathy existing between us, contrast him continually in our
mind with Sir Hudson Lowe, who is so unlike him.

The Admiral had seen the Emperor, who is also partial to him. They had
taken together some turns in the garden, and the Admiral told me had
collected some excellent information respecting the Scheldt and the
Nievendip, a maritime establishment in Holland which was entirely
unknown to him, and which was founded by Napoleon.

After dinner, the conversation turned upon what the Emperor termed the
celebrated bills of St. Domingo. It gave rise to the following curious
details.—“The administrator of St. Domingo,” said the Emperor, “took it
into his head one day to draw from the Cape, without authority, for the
sum of sixty millions, in bills, on the treasury in Paris, which bills
were all payable on the same day. France was not then, and had, perhaps,
never been, rich enough to meet such a demand. Besides, where and by
what means had the administration of St. Domingo acquired such a credit?
The First Consul could not command any thing like it in Paris; it was as
much as M. Necker could have done at the time of his greatest
popularity. Be that as it may, when these bills appeared in Paris, where
they arrived before the letters of advice, the First Consul was applied
to from the treasury, to point out what was to be done. ‘Wait for the
letters of advice,’ said he, ‘in order to learn the nature of the
transaction. The treasury is like a capitalist; it possesses the same
rights, and should follow the same course. These bills are not accepted,
they are, consequently, not payable.’ However, the necessary
information, and the vouchers, arrived. These bills stated value
received, but the receipts of the officers in charge of the chest, into
whose hands the money had been paid, were for only one tenth, one fifth,
one third of the amount of the respective bills. The treasury,
therefore, would only acknowledge and refund the sum really and _bona
fide_ paid; and the bills in their tenour were declared to be false.
This raised a great clamour, and produced a terrible agitation amongst
the merchants. A deputation waited upon the First Consul, who, far from
endeavouring to avoid it, opened the business at once, and asked
‘whether they took him for a child, whether they thought he would sport
thus with the purest blood of the people, or that he was so indifferent
a guardian of the public interest? What he refused to give up,’ he said,
‘did not affect him personally, did not trench upon his civil list, but
it was public property, of which he was the guardian, and which was the
more sacred in his eyes on that account.’ Then, addressing the two
persons at the head of the deputation, he said: ‘You, gentlemen, who are
merchants, bankers, men of business, give me a positive answer. If one
of your agents abroad were to draw upon you for very large sums contrary
to your expectations and to your interests, would you accept, would you
pay his bills?’ They were obliged to admit they would not. ‘Then,’ said
the First Consul, ‘you, who are simple proprietors, and in the right of
your majority responsible for your own actions only, you would wish to
possess a right which you refuse to allow to me, proprietor in the name
of all, and who am in that quality always a minor and subject to
revision! No, gentlemen, I shall enjoy your privileges in the name and
for the benefit of all; the actual amount received for your bills shall
be repaid you and no more. I do not ask the merchants to take the bills
of my agents: it is an honour, a mark of credit, to which I do not
aspire; if the merchants do take them, it must be at their own risk and
peril; I only acknowledge and consider as sacred the acceptance of my
Minister of the Treasury.’ Upon this they again expostulated, and a
great deal of idle talk ensued. They should be obliged, they said, to
declare themselves bankrupts; they had received these bills, for ready
money; their agents abroad had committed the error of taking them,
through respect for, and confidence in, the government. ‘Very well,’
said the First Consul, ‘become bankrupts. But they did not,’ observed
the Emperor, ‘they had not received these bills for ready money, and
their agents had not committed any error.’

“The members of the deputation left the First Consul, convinced in their
own minds of the validity of his reasons; nevertheless, they filled
Paris with their clamours and with falsehoods, misrepresenting the
affair altogether.

“This transaction,” said the Emperor, “and its details, explain many
other transactions which have been much spoken of in Paris under the
Imperial administration.

“The commercial world had particularly said, and repeated, that this
proceeding was unexampled; that such a violation of credit was a thing
hitherto unheard of; but to that the First Consul replied that he would
set the question at rest by quoting precedents, and he recalled to their
minds the Bills of Louis XIV., the liquidations of the Regent, the
Mississippi Company, the liquidations of the wars of 1763 and of 1782,
&c.; and proved to them that what they contended to be a thing
unexampled had been the constant practice of the monarchy.”

From this affair the Emperor turned to different branches of the
administration. He defended the institution of the post of Inspectors of
Reviews. “It was only through them that the actual number of men present
could be ascertained; through them alone had this advantage been
obtained, and it was one of immense importance in the active operations
of war. And these inspectors were not less useful in an administrative
point of view; for, whatever trifling abuses might exist in the details,
and however numerous these abuses might be, it is on a general principle
that such things should be considered; and, in order to estimate fairly
the utility of this institution, it should be asked what other abuses
would have taken place if it had not existed? For myself,” said
Napoleon, “I must say that, checking the expenditure, by trying how much
the total number of troops ought to have cost according to their fixed
rates of pay, I have always found the sum paid by the treasury to fall
short of my estimate. The army, therefore, cost less than it ought to
have cost: what result more beneficial could be required?”

The Emperor quoted the administration of the navy as having been the
most regular and the most honest; it had become a master-piece. “In
that,” said he, “consisted the great merit of Decrès.” The Emperor
considered that France was too large to have only one minister for the
administration of the war department. “It was,” he said, “a task beyond
the powers of one man. Paris had been made the centre of all decisions,
contracts, supplies, and organizations; whilst the correspondents of the
minister had been subdivided amongst a number of persons equal to the
number of regiments and corps. The contrary ought to have been the case;
the correspondences should have been entered, and the resources
subdivided, by raising them on the spot where they were required. I had
long meditated a plan to establish in France twenty or twenty-five
military districts, which would have composed so many armies. There
would have been no more than that number of accountants; these would
have been twenty under-ministers; it would have been necessary to find
twenty honest men. The minister would have had only twenty
correspondents; he would have centralised the whole and made the machine
move with rapidity.

“Messieurs Gaudin and Mollien,” said the Emperor, “were of opinion that
it was necessary that the receivers-general, public financiers and
contractors, should have very large fortunes, that they should have it
in their power to make considerable profits, and openly avow them, in
such a manner as to retain a degree of consideration which they might be
careful not to endanger; and a character of honour, which they might be
anxious not to compromise. This could not be otherwise,” he said, “in
order to obtain from them support, service, and credit, in case of need.

“Another set of men, Defermont, Lacuée, and Marbois, thought, on the
contrary, that it was impossible to be too watchful, too economical, and
too strict. For my own part, I was inclined to be of the opinion of the
first, considering the views of the last to be narrow, and such as were
applicable to a regiment, but not to an army; to the expenses of a
private household, but not to the expenditure of a great empire. I
called them the Puritans and the Jansenists of the profession.”

The Emperor observed that the minister of the treasury, and the minister
secretary of state, were two of his institutions on which he most
congratulated himself, and from which he had derived the greatest
assistance. “The minister of the treasury concentrated all the
resources, and controlled all the expenses of the empire. From the
minister secretary of state all acts emanated. He was the minister of
ministers, imparting life to all intermediate acts; the grand notary of
the empire, signing and authenticating all documents. Through the first
I knew, at every moment, the state of my affairs; and through the second
I made known my decisions and my will in all directions and every where.
So that, with my minister of the treasury and my minister secretary of
state alone, and half-a-dozen clerks, I would have undertaken to govern
the empire from the remotest parts of Illyria, or from the banks of the
Niemen, with as much facility as in my capital.”

The Emperor could not conceive how affairs could go on with the four or
five secretaries of state of our kings. “And, indeed, how did they go
on?” said he. “Each imagined, executed, and controlled his own
operations. They might act in direct opposition one to another; for as
the kings only affixed their sign on the margin of the plans proposed,
or authenticated only the rough draft of their ordinances, the
secretaries of state could fill them up, or act as they pleased, without
fear of any great responsibility. Add to this that the secretaries of
state had the _griffe_[29], a contrivance, which they wanted to make me
adopt, but which I rejected as a tool appropriated to the _Rois
faineans_. Amongst these ministers, some might have money for which they
had no employment, and others might be unable to proceed for want of a
farthing. There was no common centre to combine their movements, provide
for their wants, and direct the execution of their measures.”

Footnote 29:

  A kind of seal on which a signature is engraved.

The Emperor said that a minister secretary of state was exactly suited
for kings without talents, but vain, who would want the assistance of a
prime minister and not like to own it. “Had my minister secretary of
state been made president of the council of state,” said he, “he would
have been from that moment a real prime minister, in the fullest
acceptation of the term; for he would have carried his plans to the
council of state to have them digested into laws, and would have signed
for the Prince. There can be no doubt that, with the manners and habits
of the first race of our kings, or with princes like them, my minister
secretary of state would have become in a very short time a Mayor of the
Palace.”

             REVISION OF THE CHAPTERS ON THE ARMY OF ITALY.

22d.—The Emperor resumed his researches respecting Egypt. He gave me
Strabo to look over; it was the edition which he had caused to be made.
He commended the care and pains bestowed upon it, and said that it had
been his intention to give us, in course of time, editions of all the
works of the ancients, through the official medium of the
Institute.—Before dinner the Emperor sent for me and my son, and spent
at least six hours with us, reading over and recasting the chapters on
the Tagliamento, Leoben, and Venice.

All is fine in these chapters on the Campaign of Italy. In that on the
Tagliamento, we see how one single disposition, made on the banks of
that river and hardly noticed, one of those movements which the Emperor
calls _the thought of the battle_, must inevitably lead to the gates of
Vienna.

The chapter on Venice is written after the manner of the ancients.
However, the last chapter read always seems to be that which pleases
most.

I was extremely unwell and very tired, not so much from fatigue
occasioned by work, as from bodily indisposition. We amused ourselves
this evening by reading the description of Ulysses’ departure from the
Island of Calypso, and his arrival amongst the Pheacians.

           ON SENSIBILITY.—ON THE INHABITANTS OF THE EAST AND
             WEST; DIFFERENCES OBSERVABLE BETWEEN THEM, &C.

23d.—This morning the Emperor, conversing in his room, after touching on
several subjects, spoke about sentiment, feelings, and sensibility, and
having alluded to one of us who, as he observed, never pronounced the
name of his mother but with tears in his eyes, he said, “But is this not
peculiar to him? Is this a general feeling? Do you experience the same
thing, or am I unnatural in that respect? I certainly love my mother
with all my heart; there is nothing that I would not do for her, yet if
I were to hear of her death, I do not think that my grief would manifest
itself by even a single tear; but I would not affirm that this would be
the case if I were to lose a friend, or my wife, or my son. Is this
distinction founded on nature? What can be the cause of it? Is it that
my reason has prepared me beforehand to expect the death of my mother,
as being in the natural course of events, whereas the loss of my wife,
or of my son, is an unexpected occurrence, a hardship inflicted by fate,
which I endeavour to struggle against? Perhaps also this distinction
merely proceeds from our natural disposition to egotism. I belong to my
mother, but my wife and my son belong to me.” And he went on multiplying
the reasons in support of his opinion, with his usual fertility of
invention, in which there was always something original and striking.

It is certain that he was tenderly attached to his wife and his son.
Those persons who have served in the interior of his household now
inform us how fond he was of indulging his feelings of affection towards
his family; and point out some shades in his disposition, the existence
of which we were far from suspecting at the time.

He would sometimes take his son in his arms, and embrace him with the
most ardent demonstrations of paternal love. But most frequently his
affection would manifest itself by playful teazing or whimsical tricks.
If he met his son in the gardens, for instance, he would throw him down
or upset his toys. The child was brought to him every morning at
breakfast time, and he then seldom failed to besmear him with every
thing within his reach on the table. With respect to his wife, not a day
passed here without his introducing her into his private conversations;
if they lasted any length of time, she was sure to come in for a share
in them, or to become the exclusive subject of them. There is no
circumstance, no minute particular relating to her, which he has not
repeated to me a hundred times. Penelope, after ten years’ absence, in
order to convince herself that she is not deceived, puts some questions
to Ulysses which he alone could answer. Well! I think that I should not
find it difficult to present my credentials to Maria-Louisa.

In the course of the conversation in the evening, the Emperor, speaking
of different nations, said he knew of only two,—the Orientals and the
people of the West. “The English, the French, the Italians, &c.” said
he, “compose one family, and form the western division; they have the
same laws, the same manners, the same customs; and differ entirely from
the Orientals, particularly with respect to their women and their
servants. The Orientals have slaves; our servants are free: the
Orientals shut up their women; our wives share in all our rights: the
Orientals keep a seraglio, but polygamy has never been admitted in the
West at any period. There are several other distinctions,” said the
Emperor; “it is said that as many as eighty have been reckoned. The
inhabitants of the East and of the West are therefore,” observed the
Emperor, “really two distinct nations:—with the Orientals every thing is
calculated to enable them to watch over their wives and make sure of
them; all our institutions in the West tend, on the contrary, to put it
out of our power to watch over ours, and to make it necessary for us to
rely upon them alone. With us, every man who does not wish to pass for
an idiot must have some occupation; and whilst he is attending to his
business, or fulfilling the duties of his situation, who will watch for
him? We must therefore, with our manners, rely entirely on the honour of
our women, and place implicit confidence in them. For my part,” added he
good-humouredly, “I have had both wives and mistresses; but it never
came into my head to use any particular precaution to watch over them,
because I thought that it was with these things as with the fear of
daggers and poison in certain situations of life; the torment of
guarding against them is greater than the danger we wish to avoid: it is
better to trust to one’s fate.

“It is, however, a very knotty question to decide, which is the best
method, ours or that of the Orientals; though, probably, not for you,
ladies,” said he, casting an arch-look upon those who were present. “Yet
it is certain that it would be a very great error to suppose that the
Orientals have fewer enjoyments than we have, and are less happy than we
are in the West. In the East, the husbands are very fond of their wives,
and the wives are very much attached to their husbands. They have as
many chances of happiness as we have, however different they may seem;
for every thing is conventional amongst men, even in those feelings
which, one would suppose, ought to be dictated by Nature alone. Besides,
the women in the East have their rights and privileges, as ours have
theirs: it would be quite as impossible to prevent them from going to
the public bath, as it would be to prevent our women from going to
church; and both abuse that liberty. You see, therefore, that the
imagination, feelings, virtues, and failings of human nature, are
circumscribed within a very narrow compass; and that the same things,
with few exceptions and differences, are to be found everywhere.”

He then proceeded to account for, or to justify, polygamy among the
Orientals in a very ingenious manner. “It never existed,” he said, “in
the West: the Greeks, the Romans, the Gauls, the Germans, the Spaniards,
the Britons, never had more than one wife. In the East, on the other
hand, polygamy has existed in all ages: the Jews, the Assyrians, the
Tartars, the Persians, the Turcomans, had all of them several wives.
Whence could this universal and invariable difference have arisen? Was
it owing to accident and to mere caprice? Did it depend on physical
causes in individuals? No. Were woman less numerous, in proportion,
among us than in Asia? No. Were they more numerous in the East than the
men? No. Were the latter of superior stature, to us, or differently
constituted? No. The fact is that the legislator, or that wisdom from on
high which supplies his place, must have been guided by the force of
circumstances arising from the respective localities. All the people of
the West have the same form, the same colour; they compose but one
nation, one family: it has been possible, as at the moment of the
Creation, to assign to them but one helpmate—happy, admirable,
beneficent law, which purifies the heart of the man, exalts the
condition of the woman, and assures to both a multitude of moral
enjoyments!

“The Orientals, on the other hand, differ from one another as much as
day and night, in their forms and colours: they are white, black,
copper-coloured, mixed, &c. The first thing to be thought of was their
conservation, to establish a consanguineous fraternity among them,
without which they would have been everlastingly persecuting,
oppressing, exterminating one another: this could only be accomplished
by the institution of polygamy, and by enabling them to have at one and
the same time a white, black, mulatto, and copper-coloured wife. The
different colours now constituting part of one and the same family, thus
became blended in the affections of the chief and in the opinions of
each of the females relatively to the others.

“Mahomet,” he added, “seems to have been acquainted with the secret, and
to have been guided by it: otherwise how happened it that he, who treads
so closely in the steps of Christianity, and deviates from it so little,
did not suppress polygamy? Do you reply that he retained it only because
his religion was wholly sensual? In this case, he would have allowed the
Mussulmans an indefinite number of wives, whereas he limited it to four
only, which would seem to imply a black, a white, a copper-coloured, and
a mixed.

Besides, let it not be supposed that this favour of the law was put in
practice for the whole nation; or there would not have been wives for
them all. In fact, eleven twelfths of the population have but one,
because they cannot maintain more, but polygamy in the chiefs is
sufficient to attain the grand object: for, the confusion of races and
of colours existing, by means of polygamy, in the higher class, it is
enough to establish union and perfect equality among all. We must,
therefore admit,” he concluded, “that if polygamy was not the offspring
of a political combination, if it owed its origin to chance alone, that
chance has in this instance, produced as much as consummate wisdom.”

The Emperor said that he had seriously thought of applying this
principle to our colonies, in order to harmonize the welfare of the
Negroes with the necessity for employing them. He had even, he said,
consulted divines on this subject, to ascertain if there were not means,
considering local circumstances, of reconciling our religious notions
with this practice.

The Emperor continued conversing in this manner until after midnight.

ON HOLLAND AND KING LOUIS.—COMPLAINTS OF THE EMPEROR AGAINST THE MEMBERS
  OF HIS FAMILY.—MATTERS OF HIGH POLICE, &C.—LETTER TO KING LOUIS, THE
  EMPEROR’S BROTHER.

24th.—The Emperor sent for me at about half-past twelve to his closet.
Our conversation turned upon the succession of authors through which the
light of history has been transmitted to us from the remotest antiquity
down to the present time. This led him to read that part of the first
table of the Historical Atlas which gives a recapitulation of them, and
presents the whole at one view.

The conversation turned on the diversities of the human species. The
Emperor sent for Buffon, to throw light upon the question; and continued
for some time employed in seeking information on the subject.

Having dressed, the Emperor sent for my son, and we worked three or four
hours at the chapters of the Campaign of Italy.

When this was completed, the conversation, through a variety of
subjects, turned upon Holland and King Louis, respecting whom he said
some things worthy of observation.

“Louis is not destitute of intelligence,” said the Emperor, “and has a
good heart; but even with these qualifications a man may commit many
errors, and do a great deal of mischief. Louis is naturally inclined to
be capricious and fantastical, and the works of Jean Jaques Rousseau
have contributed to increase this disposition. Seeking to obtain a
reputation for sensibility and beneficence, incapable by himself of
enlarged views, and, at most, competent to local details, Louis acted
like a Prefect rather than a king.

“No sooner had he arrived in Holland, than, fancying that nothing could
be finer than to have it said that he was thenceforth a true Dutchman,
he attached himself entirely to the party favourable to the English,
promoted smuggling, and thus connived with our enemies. It became
necessary from that moment to watch over him, and even to threaten to
attack him. Louis, then, seeking a refuge against the weakness of his
disposition in the most stubborn obstinacy, and mistaking a public
scandal for an act of glory, fled from his throne, declaiming against me
and against my insatiable ambition, my intolerable tyranny. What then
remained for me to do? Was I to abandon Holland to our enemies? Ought I
to have given it another King? But in that case could I have expected
more from him than from my own brother? Did not all the kings that I
created act nearly in the same manner? I therefore united Holland to the
empire; and this act produced a most unfavourable impression in Europe,
and contributed not a little to pave the way to our misfortunes.

“Louis was delighted to take Lucien as his model: Lucien had acted
nearly in the same manner; and if, at a later period, he has repented,
and has even nobly made amends for his errors, this conduct did honour
to his character, but could not produce any favourable change in our
affairs.

“On my return from Elba in 1815, Louis wrote a long letter to me from
Rome, and sent an ambassador to me. It was his treaty, he said, the
conditions upon which he would return to me. I answered that I would not
make any treaty with him, that he was my brother, and that if he came
back he would be well received.

“Will it be believed that one of his conditions was that he should be at
liberty to divorce Hortense! I severely rebuked the negotiator for
having dared to be the bearer of so absurd a proposal, and for having
believed that such a measure could ever be made the subject of a
negotiation. I reminded Louis that our family compact positively forbade
it, and represented to him that it was not less forbidden by policy,
morality, and public opinion. I farther assured him that, actuated by
all these motives, if his children were to lose their state through his
fault, I should feel more interested for them than for him, although he
was my brother.

“Perhaps an excuse might be found for the caprice of Louis’s disposition
in the deplorable state of his health, the age at which it became
deranged, and the horrible circumstances which produced that
derangement, and which must have had a considerable influence upon his
mind; he was on the point of death on the occasion, and has, ever since,
been subject to most cruel infirmities: he is almost paralytic on one
side.

“It is certain, however,” added the Emperor, “that I have derived little
assistance from my own family, and that they have severely injured me
and the great cause. The energy of my disposition has often been
extolled; but I have been a mere milksop, particularly with my family;
and well they knew it after the first moment of anger was over, they
always carried their point by perseverance and obstinacy. I became tired
of the contest, and they did with me just as they pleased. These are
great errors which I have committed. If, instead of this, each of them
had given a common impulse to the different bodies which I placed under
their direction, we should have marched on to the poles; every thing
would have given way before us; we should have changed the face of the
world; Europe would now enjoy the advantages of a new system, and we
should have received the benedictions of mankind! I have not been so
fortunate as Gengis Khan, with his four sons, each of whom rivalled the
other in zeal for his service. No sooner had I made a man a king, than
he thought himself king _by the grace of God_, so contagious is the use
of the expression. He was then no longer a lieutenant, on whom I could
rely, but another enemy whom I was obliged to guard against. His efforts
were not directed towards seconding me, but towards rendering himself
independent. They all immediately imagined that they were adored and
preferred to me. From that moment I was in their way, I endangered their
existence! Legitimate monarchs would not have behaved differently; would
not have thought themselves more firmly established. Weak-minded men!
who, when I fell, had occasion to convince themselves that the enemy did
not even do them the honour to demand the surrender of their dignities,
or even to allude to it. If they are now put under personal restraint,
if they are subject to vexation, it must proceed, on the part of the
conqueror, from a wish to impose the weight of power, or from the base
motive of gratifying his vengeance. If the members of my family excite a
strong interest amongst mankind, it is because they belong to me and to
the common cause; but assuredly there is not the least danger of any
movement being produced by any of them. Notwithstanding the philosophy
of several of them (for some of them had said, after the fashion of the
chamberlains of the Faubourg St-Germain, that they were _forced_ to
reign,) their fall must have been sensibly felt by them, for they had
soon accommodated themselves to the pleasures and comforts of their
station; they were all really kings. Thanks to my labours, all have
enjoyed the advantages of royalty; I alone have known its cares. I have
all the time carried the world on my shoulders; and this occupation,
after all, is rather fatiguing.

“It will perhaps be asked, why I persisted in erecting states and
kingdoms? The manners and the situation of Europe required it. Every
time that another country was annexed to France, the act added to the
universal alarm which already prevailed, excited loud murmurs, and
diminished the chances of peace. Then why, will it be farther said, did
I indulge in the vanity of placing every member of my family on a
throne? (for the generality of people must have thought me actuated by
vanity alone:) why did I not rather fix my choice upon private
individuals possessing greater abilities? To this I reply that it is not
with thrones as with the functions of a prefect; talents and abilities
are so common in the present age, among the multitude, that one must be
cautious to avoid awakening the idea of competition. In the agitation in
which we were involved, and with our modern institutions, it was proper
to think rather of consolidating and concentrating the hereditary right
of succession, in order to avoid innumerable feuds, factions, and
misfortunes. If there was any fault in my person and my elevation,
consistently with the plan of universal harmony which I meditated for
the repose and happiness of all, it was that I had risen at once from
the multitude. I felt that I stood insulated and alone, and I cast out
anchors on all sides into the sea around me. Where could I more
naturally look for support than amongst my own relations? Could I expect
more from strangers? And it must be admitted that if the members of my
family have had the folly to break through these sacred ties, the
morality of the people, superior to their blind infatuation, fulfilled
in part my object. With them their subjects thought themselves more
quiet, more united as in one family.

“To resume: acts of that importance were not to be considered lightly;
they were involved in considerations of the highest order; they were
connected with the tranquillity of mankind, the possibility of
ameliorating its condition. If, notwithstanding all these measures,
taken with the best intentions, it seems that no permanent good has been
effected, we must admit the truth of this great maxim, that to govern is
very difficult for those who wish to do it conscientiously.”

The following letter, of a very old date, will serve to throw great
light upon the words of Napoleon, mentioned a few pages back, respecting
the conduct of his brother in Holland.

At a later period, King Louis published a sort of account of his
administration, addressed to the Dutch nation; it is particularly
interesting, after having read the above paragraph and the accompanying
letter, to take up that document of King Louis, in order to be able to
form an opinion on the subject founded on a due knowledge of all the
circumstances.

                                “_Castle of Marach, 3d April, 1808._

“Sir and brother.—The auditor D——t delivered to me an hour ago your
despatch, dated 22d March. I send a courier who will take this letter to
you in Holland.

“The use you have just made of the privilege of mercy cannot but produce
a very bad effect. This privilege is one of the finest and noblest
attributes of the sovereign power. In order not to bring it into
discredit, it must be used only in cases when the royal clemency is not
detrimental to the ends of justice, or when it is calculated to leave an
impression of being the result of generous feelings. The present case is
that of a number of banditti, who attacked and murdered several
custom-house officers, with the intention of smuggling afterwards
without interruption. These people are condemned to death; and your
Majesty extends the royal mercy to them ... to a set of murderers, to
men whom nobody can pity. If they had been caught in the act of
smuggling; if, in defending themselves, they had killed some of the
officers, then you might perhaps have taken into consideration the
situation of their families, and their own; and have shewn an example of
a kind of paternal feeling, by modifying the severity of the law, by a
commutation of punishment. It is in cases of condemnation for offences
against the revenue laws, it is more particularly in cases of
condemnation for political offences, that clemency is well applied. In
these matters the principle is that, if it is the Sovereign who is
attacked, there is a certain magnanimity in pardoning the offender. On
the first report of an affair of that kind, the sympathy of the public
is immediately excited in favour of the offender, and not of him who is
to inflict the punishment. If the Prince remits the sentence, the people
consider him superior to the offence, and the public clamour is directed
against those who have offended him. If he follows the opposite system,
he is thought vindictive and tyrannical. If he pardons atrocious crimes,
he is looked upon as weak, or actuated by bad intentions.

“Do not fancy that the privilege of mercy can always be used without
danger, and that society will always commend the exercise of it in the
Sovereign. The Sovereign is blamed when he applies it in favour of
murderers or great malefactors, because it then becomes injurious to the
interests of the community. You have too frequently, and on too many
occasions, extended the royal mercy. The kindness of your heart must not
be listened to when it can become prejudicial to your people. In the
affair of the Jews, I should have done as you did; but in that of the
smugglers of Middelburg, I should not have pardoned on any account. Many
reasons ought to have induced you to let justice take its course, and
give the example of an execution which would have produced the excellent
effect of preventing many crimes by the terror which it would have
inspired. Public officers are murdered in the middle of the night—the
murderers are condemned. Your Majesty commutes the punishment of death
into a few years’ imprisonment! How much will this not tend to
dishearten all the persons employed in the collection of your revenue!
The political effect produced by it is also very bad, for the following
reasons:—Holland was the channel through which England had, for many
years, introduced her goods on the Continent. The Dutch merchants have
made immense profits by this trade; and that is the reason why the Dutch
nation is partial to England, and fond of smuggling, and why it hates
France, who forbids smuggling and opposes England. The mercy which you
have extended to these smugglers and murderers is a kind of compliment
which you have paid to the taste of the Dutch for smuggling. You appear
to make common cause with them,—and against whom? Against me.

“The Dutch love you: your disposition is amiable, your manners are
unaffected, and you govern them according to their inclination; but you
would make a beneficial use of the influence you possess if you shewed
yourself positively determined to suppress smuggling, and if you opened
their eyes to their real interests: they would then think that the
system of prohibition is good, since it is observed by the King. I
cannot see what advantage your Majesty can derive from a species of
popularity which you would acquire at my expense. Certainly Holland is
no longer what it was at the time of the treaty of Ryswick; and France
is not in the situation in which it was placed during the last years of
the reign of Louis XIV. If, therefore, Holland is unable to follow a
system of policy independent of that of France, it must fulfil the
conditions of the alliance.

“It is not to the present alone that sovereigns must accommodate their
policy; the future must also be the object of their consideration. What
is at this moment the situation of Europe? On one side, England, who
possesses, by her sole exertions, a dominion to which the whole world
has been hitherto compelled to submit. On the other side, the French
Empire and the Continental States, which, strengthened by the union of
their powers, cannot acquiesce in this supremacy exercised by England.
Those states had also their colonies and a maritime trade; they possess
an extent of coast much greater than England; but they have become
disunited, and England has attacked the naval power of each separately:
England has triumphed on every sea, and all navies have been destroyed.
Russia, Sweden, France, and Spain, which possess such ample means for
having ships and sailors, dare not venture to send a squadron out of
their ports. It is, therefore, no longer from a confederation amongst
the maritime powers—a confederation which it would be besides impossible
to maintain, on account of the distance, and of the interference of the
various interests of each with those of the others—that Europe can
expect its maritime emancipation, and a system of peace, which can be
established only by the will of England.

“I wish for peace; I wish to obtain it by every means compatible with
the dignity of the power of France; at the expense of every sacrifice
which our national honour can allow. Every day I feel more and more that
peace is necessary; and the sovereigns of the Continent are as anxious
for peace as I am. I feel no passionate prejudice against England; I
bear her no insurmountable hatred: she has followed against me a system
of repulsion; I have adopted against her the Continental system, not so
much from a jealousy of ambition, as my enemies suppose, but in order to
reduce England to the necessity of adjusting our differences. Let
England be rich and prosperous; it is no concern of mine, provided
France and her allies enjoy the same advantages.

“The Continental system has, therefore, no other object than to advance
the moment when the public rights of Europe and of the French Empire
will be definitively established. The sovereigns of the North observe
and enforce strictly the system of prohibition, and their trade has been
greatly benefited by it: the manufactures of Prussia may now compete
with ours. You are aware that France, and the whole extent of coast
which now forms part of the Empire, from the Gulf of Lyons to the
extremity of the Adriatic, are strictly closed against the produce of
foreign industry. I am about to adopt a measure with respect to the
affairs of Spain, the result of which will be to wrest Portugal from
England, and subject all the coasts of Spain, on both seas, to the
influence of the policy of France. The coasts of the whole of Europe
will then be closed against England, with the exception of those of
Turkey, which I do not care about, as the Turks do not trade with
Europe.

“Do you not perceive, from this statement, the fatal consequences that
would result from the facilities given by Holland to the English for the
introduction of their goods on the continent? They would enable England
to levy upon us the subsidies which she would afterwards offer to other
powers to fight against us. Your Majesty is as much interested as I am
to guard against the crafty policy of the English Cabinet. A few years
more, and England will wish for peace as much as we do. Observe the
situation of your kingdom, and you will see that the system I allude to
is more useful to yourself than it is to me. Holland is a maritime and
commercial power; she possesses fine sea-ports, fleets, sailors, skilful
commanders, and colonies, which do not cost any thing to the
mother-country; and her inhabitants understand trade as well as the
English. Has not Holland, therefore, an interest in defending all those
advantages? May not peace restore her to the station she formerly held?
Granted that her situation may be painful for a few years; but is not
this preferable to making the King of Holland a mere governor for
England, and Holland and her colonies a vassal of Great Britain? Yet the
protection which you would afford to English commerce would lead to that
result. The examples of Sicily and Portugal are still before your eyes.

“Await the result of the progress of time. You want to sell your
spirits, and England wants to buy them. Point out the place where the
English smugglers may come and fetch them; but let them pay for them in
money and never in goods, _positively never!_ Peace must at last be
made; and you will then conclude a treaty of commerce with England. I
may perhaps also make one with her, but in which our mutual interests
shall be reciprocally guaranteed. If we must allow England to exercise a
kind of supremacy on the sea, a supremacy which she will have purchased
at the expense of her treasure and her blood, and which is the natural
consequence of her geographical position and of her possessions in the
three other parts of the globe; at least our flags will be at liberty to
appear on the ocean without being exposed to insult, and our maritime
trade will cease to be ruinous. For the present we must direct our
efforts towards preventing England from interfering in the affairs of
the Continent.

“I have been led on, from the consideration of the mercy which you have
granted, to the above details, and I have entered into them because I
feared that your Dutch Ministers may impress your Majesty’s mind with
false notions.

“I wish you to reflect seriously upon the contents of this letter, and
to render the different subjects it treats upon objects of the
deliberations of your councils, in order that your Ministers may give a
proper direction and tendency to their measures. Under no pretence
whatever will France allow Holland to separate herself from the
Continental system.

“With respect to these smugglers, since the fault has been committed, it
cannot be undone. I advise you, however, not to leave them in the prison
of Middelburg; it is too near the spot where the crime was perpetrated:
send them to the remotest part of Holland. The present having no other
object, &c.

                                           (Signed)      “Napoleon.”

During dinner the Emperor asked his groom how his horse was; the groom
answered that it was well fed, in good spirits, and in excellent
condition. “I hope he does not complain of me,” said the Emperor, “if
ever horse led the life of a canon, it is assuredly this.” It is now two
or three months since the Emperor was on horseback.

ZEAL FOR WORKING.—IDEAS AND PLANS OF NAPOLEON RESPECTING OUR HISTORY,
  &C.—ON THE WORKS PUBLISHED, &C.—M. MÉNÉVAL; CURIOUS PARTICULARS.

25th—27th. The Emperor for some days past has been remarkably assiduous.
All our mornings have been spent in making researches concerning Egypt,
in the works of the ancient authors. We have looked over Herodotus,
Pliny, Strabo, &c., together, without any other intermission than that
which we required to eat our breakfast, which was served on his small
table. The weather continued unfavourable, and the Emperor dictated
every day and the whole day.

At dinner he told us that he found himself much better, and we then
observed to him that for some time past, however, he had not been out of
the house, and was occupied eight, ten, or twelve hours a day. “That is
the very reason of my being better,” said he: “occupation is my element;
I was born and made for it. I have found the limits beyond which I could
not use my legs; I have seen the extent to which I could use my eyes;
but I have never known any bounds to my capability of application. I
nearly killed poor Ménéval; I was obliged to relieve him for a time from
the duties of his situation, and place him for the recovery of his
health near the person of Maria Louisa, where his post was a mere
sinecure.”

The Emperor added that, if he were in Europe and had leisure, his
pleasure would be to write history. He complained of the very
indifferent manner in which history was written every where. The
researches in which he had lately been engaged had proved this fact to
him to a degree beyond any thing he could ever have suspected.

“We have no good history,” observed he, “and we could not have any; and
the other nations of Europe are nearly in the same predicament as
ourselves. Monks and privileged persons, that is to say, men friendly to
abuses and inimical to information and learning, monopolized this branch
of writing; they told us what they thought proper, or rather that which
favoured their interests, gratified their passions, or agreed with their
own views!—He had formed,” he said, “a plan for remedying the evil as
much as possible; he intended, for instance, to appoint commissions from
the Institute, or learned men whom public opinion might have pointed out
to him, to revise, criticize, and re-publish our annals. He wished also
to add commentaries to the classic authors which are put in the hands of
our youth, to explain them with reference to our modern institutions.
With a good programme, competition, and rewards, this end would have
been accomplished; every thing,” he said, “can be obtained by such
means.”

He then repeated, what I believe I have mentioned before, that it had
been his intention to cause the history of the last reigns of our kings
to be written from the original documents in the archives of our Foreign
Office. There were also several manuscripts, both ancient and modern, in
the Imperial Library, which he intended to have printed, classifying and
embodying them under their different heads, so as to form codes of
doctrine on science, morality, literature, fine arts, &c.

He had, he said, several other plans of a similar nature. And could any
other period be found equally favourable to the execution of such plans?
When will there be again united in the same man the genius to conceive
and the power to execute them?

In order to check the production of the immense number of inferior works
with which the public was inundated, without however trenching upon the
liberty of the press, he asked what objection there could have been to
the formation of a tribunal of opinion, composed of members of the
Institute, members of the University, and persons appointed by the
government, who would have examined all works with reference to these
three points of view, science, morality, and politics; who would have
criticized them, and defined the degree of merit possessed by each. This
tribunal would have been the light of the public; it would have operated
as a warranty in favour of works of real merit, insured their success,
and thus produced emulation; whilst, on the contrary, it would
necessarily have discouraged the publication of inferior productions.

All our evenings were devoted to the Odyssey, with which we are
delighted. Polyphemus, Tiresias, and the Syrens, have quite charmed us.

The following details relate to M. Ménéval, to whom the Emperor alluded
above; they will be considered invaluable, as they will serve to exhibit
Napoleon in the sphere of his private life.

The Emperor, when First Consul, complained that he had no Secretary. He
had just dismissed the one he had had during the campaigns of Italy and
the expedition in Egypt; he was an old college acquaintance of the
Emperor’s, a man full of intelligence, and to whom he was very much
attached; but he had been obliged to part with him. His brother Joseph
then offered him his own secretary, whom he had only had for a short
time: Napoleon accepted the offer, and acquired a treasure. This the
Emperor has repeated several times since. It was Ménéval, whom he has
since made a baron, _Maître des Requêtes_, and _Secrétaire des
Commandemens_ to the Empress Maria Louisa.

Ménéval’s title, when attached to the First Consul, was Secretary of the
Portfolio; a long regulation was even made expressly regarding him; the
principal article of which was that he should never, under any pretence
whatever, have a secretary, or employ an amanuensis; which condition was
strictly observed.

M. Ménéval was a man of gentle and reserved manners, very discreet,
working at all times and at all hours. The Emperor never had reason to
be dissatisfied or displeased with him, and was very much attached to
him. The Secretary of the Portfolio had generally all the current
business, all affairs that arose on a sudden emergency, or from a sudden
thought. How many affairs, plans, and conceptions, have been discussed
and transmitted through his medium! He opened and read all letters
addressed to the Emperor; classed them for the Emperor’s examination,
and wrote under his dictation.

The Emperor dictated so fast that, most frequently, in order to save
time, the Secretary was obliged to endeavour to recollect the words,
rather than attempt to write them down at the moment they were
pronounced. In this, Ménéval particularly excelled. In the course of
time, Ménéval was authorized himself to return answers on many subjects.
He might easily have acquired great influence; but it was not in his
disposition to seek to obtain it.

The Emperor was almost always in his closet; it might be said that he
spent the whole day and part of the night in it. He usually went to bed
at ten or eleven o’clock, and rose again about twelve, to work for a few
hours more. Sometimes he sent for M. Ménéval, but most frequently he did
not; and, aware of his zeal, he would sometimes say to him, “You must
not kill yourself.”

When the Emperor went into his closet in the morning, he found bundles
of papers already arranged and prepared for him by Ménéval, who had been
there before him. If the Emperor sometimes allowed twenty-four hours, or
two days, to elapse without going into it, his Secretary would remind
him of it, and tell him that he would suffer himself to be overwhelmed
with the mass of papers that were accumulating, and that the closet
would soon be full of them. To this the Emperor usually answered
good-humouredly: “Do not alarm yourself, it will soon be cleared;” and
so indeed it was, for in a few hours the Emperor had despatched all the
answers, and was even with the current business. It is true that he got
through a great deal by not answering many things, and throwing away all
that he considered useless, even when coming from his Ministers. To this
they were accustomed; and when no answer appeared they knew what it
meant. He himself read all letters that were addressed to him; to some
he answered by writing a few words in the margin, and to others he
dictated an answer. Those that were of great importance were always put
by, read a second time, and not answered until some time had elapsed.
When leaving his closet, he generally recapitulated those affairs that
were of the greatest consequence, and fixed the hour at which they must
be ready for him, which was always punctually attended to. If at that
hour the Emperor did not come, M. Ménéval followed him about from place
to place through the palace to remind him of it. On some of these
occasions the Emperor would go and settle the affair, at other times he
would say, “To-morrow; night is a good adviser.” This was his usual
phrase; and he often said that he had indeed worked much harder at night
than during the day; not that thoughts of business prevented him from
sleeping, but because he slept at intervals, according as he wanted
rest, and a little sufficed for him.

It often happened that the Emperor, in the course of his campaigns, was
roused suddenly upon some emergency; he would then immediately get up,
and it would have been impossible to guess from the appearance of his
eyes that he had just been asleep. He then gave his decision, or
dictated his answer, with as much clearness, and with his mind as free
and unembarrassed, as at any other moment. This he called the
_after-midnight presence of mind_; and he possessed it in a most
extraordinary degree. It has sometimes happened that he has been perhaps
called up as often as ten times in the same night, and each time he was
always found to have fallen asleep again, not having as yet taken his
quantum of rest.

Boasting one day to one of his ministers (General Clarke) of the faculty
which he possessed of sleeping almost at pleasure and how little rest he
required, Clarke answered in a jocular tone, “Yes, Sire, and that is a
source of torment to us, for it is often at our expense; we come in for
our share of it sometimes.”

The Emperor did every thing himself and through the medium of his
Cabinet. He appointed to all vacant situations, and most frequently
substituted new names to those of the persons proposed to him. He read
the plans of his Ministers, adopted, rejected, or modified them. He even
indited the notes of his Minister for Foreign Affairs, which he dictated
to Ménéval, from whom he kept no secret. It was through Ménéval also
that he wrote to the different sovereigns; in addressing whom he
observed a formula which he had had drawn up from the reports of former
times, and to the strict observance of which he attached great
importance. All the Ministers transacted business with the Emperor
together on one day of the week, appointed for that purpose, unless
something occurred to prevent it. The business of each Minister was
transacted in the presence of all the others, who were allowed to give
their opinions respecting it, and each of them thus emptied his
portfolio. A register was kept of the deliberations, of which there must
be many volumes. Those documents that had been decided on were left to
have the signature affixed to them, which was done through the medium of
the Minister Secretary of State, who countersigned them. Sometimes some
of these papers, after they had been thus decided on, were still sent to
the Emperor’s cabinet to be revised and modified before the signature
was put to them. The Minister for Foreign Affairs was the only one who,
independently of his share in the general business transacted by the
other Ministers, had besides, from the secret nature of his functions,
other business to despatch in private with the Emperor.

One of the favourite aides-de-camp of the Emperor was entrusted with all
that related to the _personnel_ of the war-department. For a long time
Duroc occupied this confidential post; afterwards Bertrand and
Lauriston; Count Lobau was the last who filled it.

M. Ménéval, being in a very indifferent state of health, worn down by
fatigue from application, and requiring some interval of repose, the
Emperor gave him a situation in the household of the Empress Maria
Louisa, which was, he said, quite a sinecure. However, the Emperor only
parted with him on condition that he should come back to him as soon as
he was well; and he never failed to remind him of it every time he saw
him.

After Ménéval’s retirement, the business of the Emperor’s cabinet ceased
to be conducted by one person only; Ménéval had a great many successors
at the same moment, and the cabinet became a kind of office, in which
several persons were employed. One of these persons, whom the Emperor
had taken on the recommendation of others who had thought they could
answer for him as for themselves, received an order, at the time of the
disasters of 1814, to burn the documents that were in the closet; but,
instead of obeying this order, he so far forgot his duty as to take them
away with him: and, after the King’s restoration, he wrote to one of his
Ministers to offer them to him. The Emperor found the proof of his
treachery amongst the papers left at the Tuileries at the period of the
20th of March; and one morning having gone into his closet before any
body was come, he wrote several times on a piece of paper, as if he had
been trying his pen, _Such a one (naming him) is a traitor_—_Such a one
is a traitor_; and laid it on the table where sat one of those who had
recommended him, and who was himself, said the Emperor, a man on whose
zeal and fidelity every reliance could be placed. This was the only
reproach he ever addressed to him, and the only revenge he ever
exercised on the offender.

Several traces may therefore still be found, and several documents must
exist, of the business transacted in the Emperor’s cabinet. Some of
these documents have been alluded to in the debates of the British
Parliament; but Napoleon solemnly declared, on his return at the period
of the 20th of March last, that these documents had been falsified. And
they are not the only documents that are left of that ever-memorable
administration.

There must be twenty or thirty folio volumes, and as many in quarto,
containing the correspondence of the campaigns of Italy and of Egypt,
collected and regularly classed.

There must be also about sixty or eighty folio volumes of the
deliberations of the Council Ministers, collected by the Secretaries of
State, the Duke of Bassano and Count Daru; and lastly, the minutes of
the sittings of the Council of State, written and arranged by M. Locré.

These are real and proud titles of glory for Napoleon. Upon these
immortal monuments, all subsequent governments have modelled and
directed their administration; and from them all future governments, of
every country, will henceforth inevitably seek and derive information:
so sure and solid have been the foundations which he has laid—so
judiciously placed the landmarks—so deep are the roots—so much, in one
word, does the whole bear the stamp of genius, and the character of
rectitude and of duration.

OBSERVATIONS OF THE EMPEROR CONCERNING MY WIFE.—DICTATION OF THE EMPEROR
  FOR ANOTHER PORTION OF HIS MEMOIRS.

28th.—The Emperor to-day availed himself of an interval of fine weather
to take two turns in the calash: he said he wanted a little jolting. His
left cheek was still swelled. About three o’clock he returned; and, a
short time afterwards, having nothing to do, he sent for me, and we
walked round the garden for some time. Having perceived the Doctor, he
beckoned to him. The Doctor came up to us, and from him Napoleon heard
that the Russian and Austrian Commissioners had come the day before to
the entrance to Longwood, from which they had been turned away by the
centry placed by the Governor.

When we were alone, the Emperor, after having conversed upon a variety
of subjects, spoke of my wife, conjecturing what she might be doing,
what had become of her, &c.

“There is no doubt,” said he, presently afterwards, “that your situation
at St. Helena inspires a lively interest, and must tend to cause your
wife’s company to be sought after. Every thing relating to me is still
dear to many persons. From this rock I still bestow crowns!... Yes, my
dear friends, when you return to Europe, you will find yourselves
crowned!”

Then, speaking again of my wife, he said, with an expression of the
utmost kindness, “The best thing she could do would be to go and spend
the time of her separation from you with Madame, or some other members
of my family. They would undoubtedly feel much pleasure in taking care
of her,” &c.

When we went back into the house, the Emperor sat down to work. The
Campaign of Italy was nearly finished but he provided me with a new
subject.

“_Note, write_:”—These were the words which the Emperor uttered abruptly
when a new idea occurred. What follows is literally what he dictated to
me, in this instance: nothing has been altered in it, and he has never
read it over.

“Note.—The Campaign of Italy being completed, Las Cases will, in the
course of a week, undertake the period from the breaking of the treaty
of Amiens to the battle of Jena. In 1802 all Europe is at peace; shortly
afterwards all Europe begins war: the Republic is changed, and becomes
the Empire; the maritime question becomes the chief cause of the rupture
of the peace of Amiens.

“Las Cases will begin by causing extracts to be made from the Moniteur
of that time, by little Emanuel, under his directions: he must get
through at least six or seven a-day, which will make one hundred and
eighty, or a period of six months in one month.—There must be at least a
period of six months extracted before we begin.

“The periods preceding and following that period will be prepared and
arranged by the other gentlemen. In making the extracts, the plan
already prescribed to M. Montholon must be followed; that is, of
extracting all that relates to one event, and referring to the page and
month.

_The following will be the great events of this period_:—

 “1st, History of the flotilla.
 “2d, Declaration of Austria.
 “3d, Movements of the fleets.
 “4th, Battle of Trafalgar.
 “5th, Ulm—Austerlitz.
 “6th, Peace of Vienna.
 “7th, Negotiation of Lord Lauderdale at Paris.
 “8th, Battle of Jena.
 “_To be inserted in their respective places_:—
 “1st, Conspiracy of Georges.
 “2d, Affair of the Duc d’Enghien.
 “3d, Coronation of the Emperor, by the Pope.
 “4th, Imperial organization.

“This will be one of the most glorious periods of the history of France;
for it exhibits, in the space of one year, on one side a Pope coming to
France to crown an Emperor,—an event which had not taken place for one
thousand years before; and, on the other, the French flag waving over
the capitals of Austria and Prussia, the Roman empire dissolved, and the
Prussian monarchy destroyed.”

I take pleasure in transcribing literally the above dictation of the
Emperor’s, with his first ideas and in his first words, in order to shew
his style and manner.

It will be easily conceived with what zeal and ardour both my son and
myself devoted ourselves to this our task, the importance of which we
fully appreciated. We had not yet completed the analysis of our six
months, when I was torn from Longwood.

                        ON A HOLE IN THE GARDEN.

29th.—During dinner somebody mentioned a pool which stands in our
garden, not far from the house, and which is deep enough to admit of a
lamb having once been drowned in it, in attempting to drink. The Emperor
said on that occasion, to one of the inmates of the house: “Is it
possible, Sir, that you have not yet had this pool filled up? How guilty
you would be, and what would not your grief be, if your son were to be
drowned in it, as it might easily happen!” The person thus censured
answered that he had often intended to have it done, but that it was
impossible to get workmen. “That is not an excuse,” said the Emperor
sharply: “if _my_ son were here, I should go and fill it up with my own
hands.”

The Emperor was already in bed when he sent for me: he wished, he said,
to put some questions to me, and to inquire concerning some dates
connected with matters which concerned us materially. . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . .

           ELOQUENT DICTATIONS OF THE EMPEROR.—CHARACTERISTIC
                       DETAILS, AND PARTICULARS.

30th.—Whenever the Emperor took up a subject, if he was in the least
animated, his language was fit to be printed. He has often, when an idea
struck him forcibly, dictated in an off-hand way to any one of us who
happened to be in his way, pages of the most polished diction. The other
gentlemen of his suite must possess a great many of these dictations,
which are all most valuable. Unfortunately for me, the weak state of my
eyes, which prevented me from writing, most frequently deprived me of
this advantage.

On one occasion, when the English ministerial newspapers adverted to the
treasures which Napoleon must possess, and which he, no doubt,
concealed, the Emperor dictated as follows:

“You wish to know the treasures of Napoleon? They are immense, it is
true, but they are all exposed to light. They are: The noble harbours of
Antwerp and Flushing, which are capable of containing the largest
fleets, and of protecting them against the ice from the sea,—the
hydraulic works at Dunkirk, Havre, and Nice,—the immense harbour of
Cherbourg,—the maritime works at Venice,—the beautiful roads from
Antwerp to Amsterdam; from Mentz to Metz; from Bordeaux to Bayonne;—the
passes of the Simplon, of Mont Cenis, of Mont Genevre, of La Corniche,
which open a communication through the Alps in four different
directions; and which exceed in grandeur, in boldness, and in skill of
execution, all the works of the Romans: in these alone you will find
eight hundred millions;—the roads from the Pyrenees to the Alps, from
Parma to Spezzia, from Savona to Piedmont,—the bridges of Jena,
Austerlitz, the Arts, Sevres, Tours, Rouanne, Lyons, Turin, of the
Isere, of the Durance, of Bordeaux, of Rouen, &c.—the canal which
connects the Rhine with the Rhone by the Doubs, and thus unites the
North Sea with the Mediterranean; the canal which connects the Scheldt
with the Somme, and thus joins Paris and Amsterdam; the canal which
unites the Rance with the Vilaine; the canal of Arles, that of Pavia,
and the canal of the Rhine—the draining of the marshes of Burgoing, of
the Cotentin, of Rochfort—the rebuilding of the greater number of the
churches destroyed during the Revolution—the building of others—the
institution of numerous establishments of industry for the suppression
of mendicity—the works at the Louvre—the construction of public
warehouses, of the Bank, of the canal of the Ourcq—the distribution of
water in the city of Paris—the numerous sewers, the quays, the
embellishments, and the monuments of that large capital—the works for
the embellishment of Rome—the re-establishment of the manufactures of
Lyons—the creation of many hundreds of cotton manufactories for spinning
and for weaving, which employ several millions of hands—funds
accumulated to establish upwards of 400 manufactories of sugar from
beet-root, for the consumption of part of France, and which would have
furnished sugar at the same price as the West Indies, if they had
continued to receive encouragement for only four years longer—the
substitution of woad for indigo, which would have been at last brought
to equal in quality, and not to exceed in price, the indigo from the
Colonies—numerous manufactories for all kinds of objects of art,
&c.—fifty millions expended in repairing and beautifying the palaces
belonging to the Crown—sixty millions in furniture for the palaces
belonging to the Crown in France and in Holland, at Turin, and at
Rome—sixty millions in diamonds for the Crown, all purchased with
Napoleon’s money—_the Regent_ (the only diamond that was left belonging
to the former diamonds of the Crown) withdrawn from the hands of the
Jews at Berlin, with whom it had been pledged for three millions—the
Napoleon Museum, valued at upwards of four hundred millions, filled with
objects legitimately acquired either by money or treaties of peace known
to the whole world, by virtue of which the master-pieces it contains
were given in lieu of territory or of contributions—several millions
amassed for the encouragement of agriculture, which is the paramount
consideration for the interest of France—the introduction into France of
Merino sheep, &c.——these form a treasure of several thousand millions,
which will endure for ages! these are the monuments that will confute
calumny!”

History will say that all these things were accomplished amidst
perpetual wars, without having recourse to any loan, and whilst the
national debt was even diminishing every day, and that nearly fifty
millions of taxes had been remitted. Very large sums still remained in
his private treasury; they were guaranteed to him by the treaty of
Fontainebleau, as the result of the savings effected on his civil list
and of his other private revenues. These sums were divided and did not
go entirely into the public treasury, nor altogether into the treasury
of France!!

On another occasion, the Emperor reading in an English newspaper that
Lord Castlereagh had said, at a meeting in Ireland, that Napoleon had
declared at St. Helena that he never would have made peace with England
but to deceive her, to take her by surprise, and to destroy her; and
that, if the French army was attached to the Emperor, it was because he
was in the habit of giving the daughters of the richest families of his
empire in marriage to his soldiers: the Emperor, moved with indignation,
dictated as follows: “These calumnies uttered against a man who is so
barbarously oppressed, and whose voice is not allowed to be heard in
answer to them, will be disbelieved by all persons well educated and
susceptible of feeling. When Napoleon was seated on the first throne in
the world, then no doubt his enemies had a right to say whatever they
pleased; his actions were public, and were a sufficient answer to them;
at any rate, that conduct now belonged to public opinion, and history;
but to utter new and base calumnies against him at the present moment is
an act of the utmost meanness and cowardice, and which will not answer
the end proposed. Millions of libels have been and are still published
every day, but they are without effect. Sixty millions of men, of the
most polished nations in the world, raise their voices to confute them,
and fifty thousand English, who are now travelling on the Continent,
will, on their return home, publish the truth to the inhabitants of the
three kingdoms of Great Britain, who will blush at having been so
grossly deceived.

“As for the Bill, by virtue of which Napoleon has been dragged to this
rock, it is an act of proscription similar to those of Sylla, and still
more atrocious. The Romans unrelentingly pursued Hannibal to the utmost
extremities of Bithynia; and Flaminius persuaded King Prusias to assent
to the death of that great man; yet at Rome Flaminius was accused of
having acted thus in order to satisfy his personal hatred. It was in
vain that he urged in his defence that Hannibal, yet in the vigour of
life, might still become a dangerous enemy, and that his death was
necessary; a thousand voices were raised, and answered that acts of
injustice and ungenerous actions can never be useful to a great nation;
and that, upon such pretences as that now set forth, murder, poisoning,
and every species of crime might be justified! Succeeding generations
reproached their ancestors with this base act. They would have paid a
high price to efface the stain from their history, and, since the
revival of letters among modern nations, there is not a generation that
has not added its imprecations to those pronounced by Hannibal at the
moment when he drank the fatal cup: he cursed Rome, who, whilst her
fleets and legions covered Europe, Asia, and Africa, wreaked her
vengeance against a man alone and unprotected, because she feared, or
pretended to fear, him.

“The Romans, however, never violated the rights of hospitality: Sylla
found an asylum in the house of Marius. Flaminius, before he proscribed
Hannibal, did not receive him on board his ship and declare that he had
orders to treat him favourably; the Roman fleet did not convey him to
the Port of Ostia; and Hannibal, instead of placing himself under the
protection of the Romans, preferred trusting his person to a King of
Asia. When he was proscribed, he was not under the protection of the
Roman flag; he was under the banners of a king who was an enemy of Rome.

“If ever, in the revolutions of ages, a King of England should be
brought before the awful tribunal of his nation, his defenders will urge
in his favour the sacred character of a king, the respect due to the
throne, to all crowned heads, to the anointed of the Lord! But his
accusers will have a right to answer thus: ‘One of the ancestors of this
King, whom you defend, banished a man that was his guest, in time of
peace; afraid to put him to death in the presence of a nation governed
by positive laws and by regular and public forms, he caused his victim
to be exposed on the most unhealthy point of a rock, situated in another
hemisphere, in the midst of the ocean, where this guest perished, after
a long agony, a prey to the climate, to want, to insults of every kind!
Yet that guest was also a great Sovereign, raised to the throne on the
shields of thirty-six millions of citizens. He had been master of almost
every Capital of Europe; the greatest Kings composed his Court; he was
generous towards all; he was during twenty years the arbiter of nations;
his family was allied to every reigning family, even to that of England;
he was twice the anointed of the Lord; twice consecrated by the august
ceremonies of religion!!!’”

This passage is certainly very fine, for its truth, its diction, and
above all, for its historical richness.

The Emperor always dictated without the least preparation. I never saw
him, on any occasion, make any research respecting our history or that
of any other nation; and yet no man ever quoted history more faithfully,
more _apropos_, or more frequently. One might have supposed that he knew
history by quotations only, and that these quotations occurred to him as
by inspiration. And here I must be allowed to mention a fact which has
often struck me, and which I never could satisfactorily account for to
myself; but it is so very remarkable, and I have witnessed it so often,
that I cannot pass it in silence. It is that Napoleon seems to possess a
stock of information on several points, which remains within him, in
reserve as it were, to burst forth with splendour on remarkable
occasions, and which in his moments of carelessness appears to be not
only slumbering, but almost unknown to him altogether. With respect to
history, for instance, how often has it happened that he has asked me
whether St. Louis reigned before or after Philip the Fair, and other
questions of the same kind. But, when occasion offered, when his moment
came, then he would quote without hesitation, and with the most minute
details; and when I have sometimes happened to be in doubt, and to go
and verify, I have always found him to be right and most scrupulously
exact: I have never been able to detect him in error.

Another singular peculiarity in him of the same kind is this:—In his
common intercourse of life, and his familiar conversation, the Emperor
mutilated the names most familiar to him, even ours; yet I do not think
that this would have happened to him on a public occasion. I have heard
him many times, during our walks, repeat the celebrated speech of
Augustus; and he has never missed saying, “Take a seat, Sylla.”[30] He
would frequently create names of persons according to his fancy; and,
when he had once adopted them, they remained fixed in his mind, although
we pronounced them as they should be, a hundred times in the day, within
his hearing; but he would have been struck if we had used them as he had
altered them. It was the same with respect to orthography: in general,
he did not attend to it; yet, if our copies had contained any faults of
spelling, he would have complained of it. One day the Emperor said to
me; “You do not write orthographically, do you?” This question gave rise
to a sarcastic smile from a bystander, who thought that it was meant to
convey a reproach. The Emperor, who saw this, continued:—“At least, I
suppose you do not; for a man occupied with public or other important
business, a Minister, for instance, cannot, and need not, attend to
orthography. His ideas must flow faster than his hand can trace; he has
only time for hieroglyphics; he must put letters for words, and words
for sentences; and leave the scribes to make it out afterwards.”—The
Emperor left a great deal for the copyists to do; he was their torment:
his handwriting actually formed hieroglyphics; he often could not
decipher it himself. My son was one day reading to him a chapter of the
Campaign of Italy: on a sudden he stopped short, unable to make out the
writing. “The little blockhead,” said the Emperor, “cannot read his own
writing!”—“It is not mine, Sire.”—“And whose then?” “Your
Majesty’s.”—“How, you little rogue! do you mean to insult me?” The
Emperor took the manuscript, tried a long while to read it, and at last
threw it down, saying, “He is right: I cannot tell myself what is
written.”—He has often sent the copyists to me, to try to read to them
what he had himself been unable to decipher.

Footnote 30:

  Instead of Cinna, in Corneille’s tragedy of _Cinna_, act v. scene
  1st.—_Eng. Ed._

The Emperor accounted for the clearness of his ideas, and the faculty of
extremely protracted application which he possessed, by saying that the
different affairs were arranged in his head as in a closet. “When I wish
to turn from any business,” said he, “I close the drawer which contains
it, and I open that which contains another. They do not mix together,
and do not fatigue me or inconvenience me.” He had never been kept
awake, he said, by an involuntary pre-occupation of mind. If I wish to
sleep, I shut up all the drawers, and I am soon asleep. So that he had
always, he added, slept when he wanted rest, and almost at will.

MY ATLAS.—PREDESTINATION, &C.—THE GOVERNOR MAKES FRUITLESS ATTEMPTS TO
  BE RECEIVED BY THE EMPEROR.

Tuesday, 1st October. When I entered the Emperor’s room, he had my Atlas
in his hands. He turned over several of the genealogical maps, whose
relation and correspondence with each other he now understands
remarkably well. On closing the book, he said, “What a concatenation!
how each part results from and corroborates what goes before it! How
every part unfolds itself and remains fixed in the mind! Las Cases, if
you had done nothing more than point out the true method for
instruction, you would still have rendered a most essential service.
Every one may now clothe the skeleton as they like; it will, no doubt,
be improved upon, but the first conception is yours,” &c.

Amongst the numerous subjects of conversation which followed,
predestination was mentioned. The Emperor made many remarkable
observations on that subject; amongst others, “Pray,” said he, “am I not
said to be given to the belief in predestination?” “Yes, Sire, at least
by many people.” “Well, well! let them say on; one may sometimes be
tempted to imitate, and it may occasionally be useful.... But what are
men!... How much easier it is to occupy their attention, and to strike
their imaginations, by absurdities than by rational ideas! But can a man
of sound sense listen for one moment to such a doctrine? Either
predestination admits the existence of free will, or it rejects it. If
it admits it, what kind of predetermined result is that which the mere
will, a step, a word, may alter or modify, _ad infinitum_? If
predestination, on the contrary, rejects the existence of free will, it
is quite another question; in that case a child need only be thrown into
its cradle as soon as it is born; there is no necessity for bestowing
the least care upon it; for if it be irrevocably determined that it is
to live, it will grow though no food should be given to it. You see that
such a doctrine cannot be maintained: predestination is but a word
without meaning. The Turks themselves, those patrons of fatalism, are
not convinced of the doctrine, or medicine would not exist in Turkey;
and a man residing in a third floor would not take the trouble to go
down by the longer way of the stairs, he would immediately throw himself
out of the window: you see to what a string of absurdities that will
lead.”

At about three o’clock, the Emperor was told that the Governor wished to
communicate to him some instructions which he had just received from
London. The Emperor replied that he was unwell, that the instructions
might be sent to him, or communicated to some of his suite; but the
Governor insisted on being admitted, saying, that he wished to
communicate directly with the Emperor: he added that he had also a few
words to say to us in private, after having spoken to _the General_. The
Emperor again refused; upon which the Governor retired, saying that he
begged he might be informed when he _could_ see _the General_. This
period may be distant indeed; the Emperor, with whom I was at that
moment, having said to me that he was determined never to receive him
again.

After dinner, the Emperor had Buffon and Valmont de Bomare brought to
him. He looked at what these authors say respecting the diversities in
the human species, the difference between a negro and a white; but he
was not much satisfied with what he found in them on the subject. He
retired early to his apartment: he was unwell.

2d. The Emperor having told me that he was determined to apply again to
the study of English, and that I must oblige him every morning to take
his lesson, I accordingly went to his apartment at about half-past
twelve. I was not fortunate in the choice of the moment, for he was
lying on his sofa asleep after his breakfast. I must have vexed him, and
was very much vexed myself. However, he would not let me go away, and
read a little English for about half an hour. He was not very well. He
dressed. Having told him that we had finished what he had given us to
do, he at first proposed to go to work on the chapters of the Campaign
of Italy; but he afterwards altered his mind, and was busy the whole day
on something else. At about five o’clock he attempted to walk out, but
found the weather too cold. After dinner, he tried to read, but in vain;
he could not go on: he felt tired, drowsy, indisposed, and withdrew
almost immediately.

JURISPRUDENCE; THE CODE; MERLIN, &C.—MONUMENTS IN EGYPT.—PLAN OF AN
  EGYPTIAN TEMPLE IN PARIS.

3d. After breakfast, the Emperor took two or three turns in the garden.
We were all with him. He spoke of the communications which the Governor
had to make to us, and took a review of the different conjectures—some
good, some bad—which each of us formed on the subject. The weather was
tolerable; he ordered the calash, and we went round the wood. The heat
and the heaviness of the atmosphere, though the sun was obscured,
obliged him to go into the house again. He sat down and dictated to my
son until five o’clock.

We again tried to take a few turns in the garden; but the air was cold
and damp. He went in-doors again, and made me go to converse with him.
He turned over an English book, and stopped at a part relating to
jurisprudence, and the criminal codes of France and England,
endeavouring to compare them. Every body knows how extremely well versed
he is in our codes; but he has little knowledge of that of England, and,
with the exception of some general points, I could not answer his
questions. In the course of the conversation he said: Laws which in
theory are a model of clearness become too often a chaos in their
application; because men, with their passions, spoil every thing they
touch, &c.... Men can only avoid being exposed to the arbitrary acts of
the judge, by submitting to the despotism of the law, &c.... I had at
first fancied it would be possible to reduce all laws to simple
geometrical demonstrations; so that every man who could read, and
connect two ideas together, would be able to decide for himself; but I
became convinced, almost immediately that this idea was absurd.
However,” added he, “I should have wished to start from some fixed
point, and follow one road known to all; to have no other laws but those
inserted in the code; and to proclaim, once for all, that all laws which
were not in the code were null and void. But it is not easy to obtain
simplicity from practical lawyers: they first prove to you that
simplicity is impossible, that it is a mere chimera; and endeavour next
to demonstrate that it is incompatible with the stability and the
existence of power. Power, they say, is exposed alone to the unforeseen
machinations of all: it must therefore have, in the moment of need, arms
kept in reserve for such cases: so that, with some old edicts of
Chilperic or Pharamond, ferreted out for the occasion,” said Napoleon,
“nobody can say that he is secure from being hanged in due form and
according to law.

“So long as the subjects of discussion in the Council of State,” said
the Emperor, “were referable to the code, I felt very strong; but when
they diverged from it, I was quite in the dark, and Merlin was then my
resource—he was my light. Without possessing much brilliancy, Merlin is
very learned, wise, upright, and honest; one of the veterans of the good
old cause: he was very much attached to me.

“No sooner had the code made its appearance, than it was almost
immediately followed by commentaries, explanations, elucidations,
interpretations, and the Lord knows what besides. I usually exclaimed,
on seeing this: Gentlemen, we have cleaned the stable of Augeas; for
God’s sake do not let us fill it again!” &c.

During dinner, the Emperor made some very remarkable observations
respecting Egypt, which will be found in the chapters dictated to
Bertrand. He then reverted to his expedition to Syria, and declared that
the grand object of the expedition to Egypt was to shake the power of
England in the four quarters of the world, by effecting a revolution
capable of changing the whole face of the East, and giving a new destiny
to India. Egypt, he said, was to stand us in stead of St. Domingo, and
our American Colonies, to reconcile the liberty of the blacks with the
prosperity of our commerce. This new colony would have ruined the
English in America, in the Mediterranean, and even on the banks of the
Ganges.

Then, answering the reproach preferred against him of having deserted
his army, he said: “I merely obeyed the call of France, which summoned
me to save her, and I had a right to do so. I had received from the
Directory a _carte blanche_ for all my operations in the basin of the
Mediterranean, in Africa, and in Asia. I had full powers for treating
with the Russians, the Turks, the Barbary States, and the provinces of
India. I was at liberty to appoint a successor, to bring back the army,
or to return myself, if I thought proper.”

The Emperor thought that all he had seen in Egypt, and, particularly,
all those celebrated ruins so much talked of, were not to be compared
with Paris and the Tuileries. The only difference between Egypt and us
was, in his opinion, that Egypt, thanks to the pureness of its air and
the nature of its materials, preserved her ruins for ever; whereas the
nature of our European atmosphere would not admit of our having any for
any length of time, every thing being soon corroded and gone.

Vestiges of a thousand years’ date might be found on the banks of the
Nile; but not one would subsist on the banks of the Seine in fifty
years. He, however, regretted very much that he had not caused an
Egyptian temple to be erected at Paris: he could have wished to adorn
the capital with such a monument, &c.

        RESOURCES DURING THE EMIGRATION: ANECDOTES, &C.—OFFICIAL
                     COMMUNICATIONS.—NEW OFFENCES.

4th. At about twelve o’clock, I went to the Emperor’s apartment. He took
a good lesson of English in Telemachus: he resolved to take up my method
again; he approves of it, he said, and derives great benefit from it. He
observed that he thought I had excellent dispositions for being a very
good schoolmaster; I told him it was the fruit of my experience. He then
made me enter into a great many details respecting the time when I gave
lessons in London, during my emigration, and he was very much amused by
them. “However,” said he, “you gentlemen, must have done credit to the
profession, if not by your learning, at least, by your manners.” I then
told him that one of our Princes had taught mathematics during his
emigration. “And this alone,” said he, with animation, “would make a man
of him, and shew him to have possessed some merit; that is assuredly one
of the greatest triumphs of Madame de Genlis.”

I then related to him the following curious anecdote, which I had heard
on that subject. “The Prince was in Switzerland: and, being so
circumstanced as to find it advisable to conceal his existence, he
wished to take a name that might favour his disguise. One of our
Bishops, from the South of France, fancied that nothing could be better
than to give him the name of a young man from Languedoc then at Nismes,
who was a very zealous Protestant; which was just as it ought to be, the
Prince being in a Protestant canton. The Bishop added that there was no
appearance that the young man would ever be in the way to falsify the
Prince’s assumption of his name. But it had so happened that the young
man had gone into the army, and had become an aide-de-camp to M. de
Montesquiou, and that shortly afterwards he had emigrated precisely into
Switzerland with his general. What was his surprise to find himself at
the _table d’hôte_, at dinner with a person of his own name, of the same
religion, and who belonged to the same town! It was exactly like the
scene of the two Sosias.[31] But the best of the joke was that the young
man had also changed his name, and carefully concealed his own. Such
incidents are only to be met with in novels; they are thought of
impossible occurrence. Perhaps the present story has been rather
embellished; yet, I think, I can affirm that I heard it from the young
man himself.”

Footnote 31:

  In Moliere’s Comedy of Amphitryon. _Eng. Ed._

“But,” observed the Emperor afterwards, “those amongst you emigrants who
had created for yourselves resources abroad must have felt quite lost
when you returned to France, and ruined once more?”—“Certainly, Sire;
for we found nothing of what we had formerly left in France, and we had
just abandoned the little we had made ourselves. But we had not
calculated: our impatience to revisit our native land had over-balanced
every other consideration, and several amongst us soon found themselves
in the greatest distress, in want of every thing, although acquainted
and even intimate with many of the great personages of the day—with your
Ministers, Sire, your Councillors of State, and others. This
circumstance gave rise to a _bon mot_ from one of our _wits_. Meeting
one day, in the saloon of the Minister for Maritime Affairs, a friend
who like himself hardly knew how to manage to subsist, he exclaimed, by
way of consolation: “Well, my friend, if we die of hunger, we may still
have two or three Ministers at our funeral.” The Emperor laughed
heartily at the jest, and admitted that it gave an exact description of
the situation of affairs at the time.

After his lesson of English, and the conversation which followed, the
Emperor went out for a walk. We walked to the end of the wood, where the
calash drove up to us.

On the Emperor’s return, the Doctor came to inform him that Colonel
Reade, whom he had consented to receive instead of the Governor, wished
to be presented to him. Colonel Reade delivered to the Emperor a note of
considerable length; and I was sent for to translate it. It contained
the communications which Sir Hudson Lowe had for three or four days past
been vainly endeavouring to make in person. The note was couched in the
most offensive terms, and the Governor wished to have reserved to
himself the satisfaction of communicating its contents to the Emperor.
This is a characteristic trait, and it requires no comment. The harsh
terms in which it was expressed, and in particular the repeated threat
that we should be separated from the Emperor, vexed us exceedingly, and
put us out of spirits for the remainder of the day.

THE EMPEROR READS MY JOURNAL, AND DICTATES TO ME.—CONFERENCE BETWEEN THE
  GRAND MARSHAL AND THE GOVERNOR.

5th.—At an early hour this morning, before I had risen, I heard some one
softly open my chamber-door. My apartment is so encumbered with my own
bed and that of my son, that it is no easy matter to enter it. I
perceived a hand drawing aside my bed-curtain: it was the Emperor’s. I
was reading a book of geometry, a circumstance which amused him very
much, and, as he said, saved my reputation. I instantly rose, and soon
rejoined the Emperor, who was proceeding to the wood alone. He conversed
for a considerable time on the events of the preceding day. He then
returned to the house for the purpose of taking a bath: he was very ill,
and had passed a bad night.

He sent for me at one o’clock. He was in the drawing-room, and he
expressed a wish to take his English lesson. The weather was very hot
and close. The Emperor felt languid and dispirited: he could not bend
his mind to study, and several times fell asleep. At length he rose,
saying he was determined to shake off his lethargy, and he proceeded to
the billiard-room to breathe a little fresh air.

Conversing on the subject of the Campaigns of Italy, he enquired what I
had done with the first rough draughts, observing that all the chapters
had been several times re-copied. I told him that I had carefully
preserved them. He desired to have all the manuscripts brought to him,
and, laying aside two complete copies, he sent the rest into the kitchen
to be burnt.

I have already several times mentioned that the Emperor knew I kept a
Journal. This was a secret, and therefore he never spoke to me on the
subject, except when we happened to be alone together. He often asked me
whether I still continued my Journal, and what I could find to set down
in it. “Sire,” I replied, “all that your Majesty does and says, from
morning to night.” “Then,” said he, “you must have a monstrous deal of
repetition, and must tell many useless things! But no matter, go on,
some day we will look it over together.”

When he visited my chamber, he frequently found the faithful Aly engaged
in re-copying my Journal; for he had kindly offered to employ himself in
this way, during his leisure hours. The Emperor sometimes cast his eyes
upon Aly’s writing, and, after reading a few lines, that is to say, as
soon as he ascertained what it was, he would turn away and speak about
something else, without ever alluding to the subject. This is precisely
what had occurred this morning; and the Emperor, recollecting the
circumstance, said that he wished at length to have a sight of this
famous _jumble of trifles_. My son brought a portion of the manuscript,
and the Emperor spent upwards of two hours in perusing it. The
introduction, which relates to myself personally, fixed his attention;
he read it over twice, and then said: “Well, very well; this is a fine
inheritance for little Emanuel.” As to the Journal, he approved of its
form and general plan. He made several corrections with his own hand, on
those parts which related to his family and his childhood. He desired my
son to take the pen, and he dictated to him some details respecting
Brienne, Father Patrault, &c. When he had done, he desired me to
continue my labours, as he was pleased with them; and he promised to
furnish me with many anecdotes, particularly concerning Alexander and
the other sovereigns.

He afterwards took a drive in the calash, in which I accompanied him,
and the Journal again became the topic of conversation. The Emperor said
a great deal on the subject, and expressed himself very much pleased
with the idea. He gave me several hints respecting it, and concluded by
observing that, from the peculiar circumstances under which it was
produced, it might become a work truly unique in its character, and an
invaluable treasure to his son.

On our return to Longwood, we found the Grand Marshal, who had just
returned from Plantation House, where he had been to hold a conference
on the subject of the communications of yesterday. We anxiously awaited
the answer he might bring back. He informed us that a proposition had
been made, which was nothing less than that four of us should be
separated from the Emperor. There were many other minor points of a very
vexatious nature; but this one caused us to lose sight of all the rest.
The Governor had, however, finally agreed to remove only the Pole and
three of the domestics. According to the report of the Grand Marshal, I
was the individual upon whom the storm had lowered, of whom the Governor
most particularly complained, and whose removal, he said, he should
certainly have decided upon, had he not thought me too useful to the
Emperor. He complained that I was constantly writing to Europe,
declaiming against the Government and the injustice and oppression which
I alleged were exercised towards us. His other subjects of complaint
were, that I spoke of the Emperor to the strangers who visited Longwood
in such a way as to excite their interest; that I was constantly
endeavouring to establish communications with different individuals on
the island (and he mentioned the instance of Mrs. Sturmer); that I had
addressed, or endeavoured to transmit, various documents to Europe, &c.
However, after having spoken of me in the most angry terms, for some
reason or other, he endeavoured to soften down what he had said by a few
complimentary observations. He remarked that he could scarcely have
expected such conduct in a man possessing so much information, and whose
good character was established throughout Europe.

After dinner, the Emperor amused himself by solving some problems in
geometry and algebra: this, he said, reminded him of his youthful days;
and it surprised us all to find that the subjects were still so fresh in
his recollection.

          PECULIAR CIRCUMSTANCE CONNECTED WITH MY JOURNAL.—THE
               EMPIRE OF OPINION.—TALMA, CRESCENTINI, &C.

6th—7th. During these two days, a circumstance has occurred, which is so
nearly connected with the nature of the present work, that I cannot omit
noticing it. I have just mentioned that the Emperor had expressed
himself well satisfied with my journal: he alluded to it several times
in the course of the day, assuring me that he should feel great pleasure
in perusing and correcting it. This information, as it may be supposed,
was highly gratifying to me. The moment which I had so long and ardently
looked for had at length arrived. That which I had hastily, and,
perhaps, inaccurately, collected, was now about to receive an
inestimable correction and sanction. Imperfect points would be
developed, chasms filled up, and obscurities explained. What a fund of
historical truths and political secrets was I about to receive! Elated
by these expectations, I the first day presented myself to the Emperor
at the usual hour, having my journal with me; but he began to dictate to
me on a totally different subject, and I was obliged to put up with the
disappointment. Next day, the same thing occurred again. I now wished to
call the Emperor’s attention to my Journal; but he did not appear to
understand me, and I took the hint. I know Napoleon so well! He
possesses in the highest degree the art of not seeming to understand; he
resorts to it frequently, and always for some particular object. In the
present instance I understood him sufficiently, and I did not again
attempt to draw his attention to the subject. At first I was much
puzzled to guess the motive that had induced him to act thus; and I made
several conjectures, which have probably occurred to the reader, as well
as to myself. A few days afterwards I was forced away from him, though I
had not the least cause in the world to anticipate this fatal event.

I have dwelt on this circumstance with scrupulous exactness, because I
conceive that it affords a new guarantee of my sincerity, and serves to
explain precisely the nature of my Journal. Of the great bulk of its
contents, and in particular the important events described in it, no
doubt can be entertained. Some involuntary errors may, however, have
crept into the details, from the hasty manner in which they were
collected, and from my being deprived of the advantage of having the
manuscript revised by the only individual who was capable of correcting
its inaccuracies.

The Emperor, while he was dressing and waiting for the Grand Marshal to
take his turn in writing, amused himself by conversing on different
subjects.

He spoke of the influence of opinion, to which he so frequently alludes.
He traced its secret progress, its uncertainty, and the caprice of its
decisions. He then adverted to the natural delicacy of the French, which
he said was exquisite in matters of decorum, the laudable susceptibility
of our manners, and the graceful action and gentleness of touch which
authority must employ, if an attempt is made to interfere with the
national feeling.

“In conformity with my system,” observed he, “of amalgamating all kinds
of merit, and of rendering one and the same reward universal, I had an
idea of presenting the cross of the Legion of Honour to Talma; but I
refrained from doing this, in consideration of our capricious manners
and absurd prejudices. I wished to make a first experiment in an affair
that was unimportant, and I accordingly gave the Iron Crown to
Crescentini. The decoration was foreign, and so was the individual on
whom it was conferred. This circumstance was less likely to attract
public notice or to render my conduct the subject of discussion; at
worst, it could only give rise to a few malicious jokes. Such,”
continued the Emperor, “is the influence of public opinion. I
distributed sceptres at will, and thousands readily bowed beneath their
sway: and yet I could not give away a bit of ribbon without the chance
of incurring disapprobation; for I believe my experiment, with regard to
Crescentini, proved unsuccessful.” “It did, Sire,” observed some one
present. “The circumstance occasioned a great outcry in Paris; it drew
forth a general anathema in all the drawing-rooms of the metropolis, and
afforded ample scope for the expression of malignant feeling. However,
at one of the evening parties of the Faubourg Saint-Germain, a _bon-mot_
had the effect of completely stemming the torrent of indignation. A
pompous orator was holding forth, in an eloquent strain, on the subject
of the honour that had been conferred on Crescentini. He declared it to
be a disgrace, a horror, a perfect profanation, and inquired what right
Crescentini could have to such a distinction? On hearing this, the
beautiful Madame G—— who was present, rose majestically from her chair,
and, with a truly theatrical tone and gesture, exclaimed, ‘_Et sa
blessoure Monsieur!_ do you make no allowance for that?’ This produced a
general burst of laughter and applause, and poor Madame G—- was very
much embarrassed by her success.”

The Emperor, who now heard this anecdote for the first time, was highly
amused by it. He often afterwards alluded to it, and occasionally
related it himself.

At dinner, the Emperor informed us that he had worked for twelve hours;
and we observed that his day was not yet ended. He seemed to be ill and
fatigued.

              THE ODYSSEY—COMBAT BETWEEN ULYSSES AND IRUS.

8th. When I entered the Emperor’s apartment this morning, I found him
engaged in reading the files of the _Journal des Debats_, which had
lately arrived. At three o’clock he began to dress. His first valet de
chambre was ill; and he observed that those who acted as his substitutes
were not equal to him in address.

The weather was tolerable, and we walked to the extremity of the wood,
where the calash was to take us up.

I had a disposable sum of money in London, which I had conveyed thither
in 1814. The recollection of the privations I had endured during my
emigration, and the chance of being exposed to future want, had prompted
me to this act of prudence, and I was now reaping the fruits of it.
Owing to this circumstance, I was more at my ease, as to pecuniary
affairs, than any other individual of the Emperor’s suite at St. Helena;
but what led me to regard this sum as an inestimable treasure was the
happiness of being able to lay it at the feet of the Emperor. I had
already several times proposed that he should accept it; and I now once
more repeated the offer, while I adverted to the renewed outrages which
we had just experienced from the Governor. At this moment we were joined
by Madame de Montholon, who had set out after us. She observed that the
Emperor walked so fast that she should certainly have lost sight of him,
had not my gesticulations enabled her to keep her eye upon us; and that
she had been puzzled to guess the cause of my vehemence of manner.
“Madam,” said the Emperor with the most captivating grace, “he has been
trying to make me accept his bounty; he has been offering to support us
here.”

We returned almost immediately to the house, as the weather was very
damp and the Emperor complained of tooth-ache. For some time past he has
been troubled with a profuse secretion of saliva.

After dinner he resumed the reading of the Odyssey: we had arrived at
the passage describing the combat between Ulysses and Irus, on the
threshold of the palace, both in the garb of beggars. The Emperor very
much disapproved of this episode, which he pronounced to be mean,
incongruous, and beneath the dignity of the King. “And yet,” continued
he, “independently of all the faults which, in my opinion, this incident
presents, I still find in it something to interest me. I fancy myself in
the situation of Ulysses, and then I can well conceive his dread of
being overpowered by a wretched mendicant. Every prince or general has
not the broad shoulders of his guards or grenadiers; every man has not
the strength of a porter. But Homer has remedied all this by
representing his heroes as so many giants. We have no such heroes
now-a-days. What would become of us,” he added, glancing round at us
all, “if we lived in those good times when bodily vigour constituted
real power? Why, Noverraz (his valet-de-chambre) would wield the sceptre
over us all. It must be confessed that civilization favours the mind
entirely at the expense of the body.”

THE POLE ARRESTED BY THE GOVERNOR.—THE EMPEROR’S REFLECTIONS ON HIS SON
  AND ON AUSTRIA.—NEW VEXATIONS.—REMARKS ON LORD BATHURST.—OBSERVATIONS
  DICTATED BY NAPOLEON.

9th.—As we were walking to come up with the calash, we received
information that the Pole had just been put under arrest by the
Governor. This was, of course, merely a first step—a warning of what we
all had to expect. Intimidation seems to be the system to which the
Governor has resorted since the arrival of his last instructions, which
he endeavours to fulfil to the utmost of his ingenuity. We shall see how
far he will go.

When I waited on the Emperor, before dinner, I found him dull and
apparently absent. The conversation led him to mention Austria, and he
alluded to the wrongs which he had received from that Power, and the
errors of her policy. He described the weakness of the monarch, who, he
said, had never evinced energy, except when it tended to ruin him in the
estimation of his subjects. He dwelt on the venality and want of
principle which distinguished the men who had advised and executed the
measures of the Austrian cabinet. He spoke of the blind policy of
Austria, and described her dangerous situation. “She now stands,” said
he, “in the most imminent peril, advancing to meet the embraces of a
colossus in her front, while she cannot recede a single step, because an
abyss is yawning on her flank and rear.”

This turn of the conversation naturally led the Emperor to speak of his
son. “What education will they give him?” said he. “What sort of
principles will they inculcate in his youthful mind? On the other hand,
if he should prove weak in intellect—if they should inspire him with
hatred of his father! These thoughts fill me with horror! and where is
the antidote to all this? Henceforth there can be no certain medium of
communication—no faithful tradition between him and me! At best my
Memoirs, or perhaps your Journal, may fall into his hands. But to subdue
the false precepts imbibed in early life, to counteract the errors of a
bad education, requires a certain capacity, a certain strength of mind
and decision of judgment which fall not to the share of every one.” He
appeared deeply affected; and, after a pause of a few moments, he said,
suddenly and with emphasis, “But let us talk of something else;”
however, he still continued silent. I sat down to write, and after an
hour or two the Grand Marshal came and took my place.

Just after I had quitted the Emperor’s apartments, I was again sent for
to translate to him a large packet of papers which had been received
from the Governor. The state of my eyes, which are now altogether
failing me, obliged me to avail myself of M. de Montholon’s assistance
in reading the papers.

Their contents were 1. Some of the new restrictions that have been
imposed on us, in which the Emperor is treated in a way that may be
termed curious; for indecency and indecorum are carried so far as to
prescribe the nature and limits of the conversations which he is to be
permitted to hold. This will scarcely be credited!

2. The form of the declaration which was presented for our signature.
This was merely a series of arbitrary and useless vexations, heightened
by every irritating circumstance that vengeance could suggest.

3. Finally a letter from the Governor to the Grand Marshal, founded on
the note presented by Colonel Reade, which I translated to the Emperor,
and which the colonel had refused to leave behind him; the reader will
recollect my having already noticed it. However, in the letter now
transmitted to the Emperor certain essential points were very
ingeniously suppressed or modified: the Emperor frequently remarked that
the Governor possesses a peculiar talent for business of this sort. I
will here retrace this note from recollection. Though I read it only
once, namely, at the time when I translated it to the Emperor, yet I
think I can vouch for the following being an accurate representation of
its contents.

“The Frenchmen who wished to remain with General Bonaparte, were
required to sign the formula which should be presented to them, and by
which they would subject themselves to all the restrictions imposed on
the General. This obligation was to be regarded as perpetual. Those who
should refuse to enter into this agreement were to be sent to the Cape
of Good Hope. Four individuals were to be removed from the suite of
General Bonaparte. Those who might remain were to be considered as
though they were Englishmen by birth, and to be subject to the laws
established for securing the safe custody of General Bonaparte; that is
to say, they would incur the punishment of death by conniving at his
escape. Any Frenchmen who might use insulting language or reflections,
or behave so as to give offence to the Governor or the Government, would
be immediately removed to the Cape of Good Hope, without being provided
with the means of returning to Europe: the whole expense of the voyage
devolving on himself.”

During dinner, and the greater part of the evening, these documents
became the subject of conversation.

We were much amused by that passage in the Governor’s letter which
transmitted the ministerial instructions, and informed us that those who
might be wanting in respect for the Governor, or render themselves
obnoxious, would be removed to the Cape, and the expense attending their
return to Europe was to be defrayed by themselves. We thought this very
droll, and the Emperor said, “Of course this threat appears to you very
extraordinary and ridiculous; but no doubt it was perfectly natural to
Lord Bathurst. I dare say he could not imagine a more terrible
punishment. It is a true shopkeeper idea!”

The Emperor concluded the evening by reading to us Adelaide Duguesclin,
which contains a fine rhodomontade upon the Bourbons.

After reading it, the Emperor said, “During the time of my power, an
order was given for suppressing the performance of this drama, under the
idea that it would be offensive to me. This circumstance accidentally
came to my knowledge, and I ordered the piece to be revived. Many things
of the same kind took place; people often acted very unwisely under the
idea that they were serving or pleasing me.”

I transcribe here the restrictions to which I have just alluded. They
are curious in themselves, and will serve better than volumes of
description, to give a just idea of our situation; but what enhances the
value of this document is that the observations which accompany each
article were made by the Emperor himself.

RESTRICTIONS drawn up by Sir Hudson Lowe, and transmitted to Longwood on
the 19th of October, 1816, but which he had already put into execution
by different secret orders, since the preceding month of August, though
he never communicated them to the English officers on duty, doubtless,
because he was ashamed of them.

                       TEXT OF THE RESTRICTIONS.

“1st.—Longwood, with the road by Hut’s Gate, along the hill, as far as
the signal-post near Alarm-House, are to be fixed as boundaries.“

OBSERVATION. Sir Hudson Lowe’s predecessor had extended the boundary
line to the summits of the hills; but in about a fortnight, he perceived
that, by removing the sentinels to a little further distance, the house
and garden of Secretary-general Brook would be included within the
boundaries, and he immediately gave orders for the change.

At about forty fathoms from the road-side is Corbett’s garden, which
contains about eight or ten oak trees and a fountain; thus affording a
cool and agreeable shade.[32] According to the new restrictions, which
confined him to the high-road, a line is substituted for a surface, and
the secretary’s house and Corbett’s garden are excluded from the
boundaries.

Footnote 32:

  In the very spot here described by Napoleon is his grave.

“2d.—Sentinels will mark the boundary lines, which nobody must pass to
approach the house or grounds of Longwood, without the Governor’s
permission.”

OBSERVATION. By the regulations which were first laid down, respecting
our establishment at St. Helena, and which were approved by the English
Governor, persons were admitted to Longwood in the following manner: The
Governor, the Admiral, the Colonel commanding the regiment and the camp,
the two members of the East India Company’s Council, and the
Secretary-general, who were the persons highest in authority on the
island, might pass the line of sentinels without any order or permission
whatever. The inhabitants of the Island were required to have a pass
from the Governor; naval men to be furnished with one from their
Admiral, and military with one from their colonel; and finally, the
inhabitants, sailors, and officers might all come to Longwood by the
permission of Count Bertrand, when the Emperor wished to receive them.
This arrangement, which continued for eight months, was attended by no
inconvenience. By the present regulation (which has been in force since
the month of August, though it was not formally communicated to us until
we were furnished with the list of new restrictions,) we may be said to
be kept in solitary confinement, and cut off from all intercourse with
the inhabitants. The latter, the officers and seamen are all equally
averse to the idea of being obliged to solicit the Governor’s permission
to visit Longwood, and to subject themselves to an interrogatory
respecting the motive of their visit. Strangers, whether civil or
military, officers, touching at St. Helena on their passage from India,
and who might be desirous of seeing the Emperor, usually applied to
Count Bertrand, who appointed the day and the hour when they would be
received. During their stay in the island they were regarded as
citizens, and with the permission of Count Bertrand, they might when
they pleased visit Longwood; and it may once more be observed that this
arrangement subsisted for eight months without being attended by any
inconvenience. If any strangers touching at the island might excite the
suspicion of the Governor, he could prevent them from landing, or
passing the first post. Finally, the Governor, by the report of the
sentinels, was daily made acquainted with the names of the persons who
visited Longwood. But in the month of August, the Governor sought to
impose on us the obligation of receiving strangers, to whom he wished to
render himself agreeable, and also of receiving them at the time he
might think proper to appoint. This was putting the finishing stroke to
all his offensive conduct! To put a stop to all these insults, the
Emperor found himself obliged to declare that he would in future receive
no one.

“3d.—The road to the left of Hut’s Gate, which turns off by Woodridge to
Longwood, never having been frequented by General Bonaparte since the
arrival of the Governor, the post by which it was observed, will be in a
great measure withdrawn. But whenever the General may wish to ride on
horseback in this direction, on giving timely notice to the officer he
will experience no obstacle.“

OBSERVATION.—In the first observation it was proved that the limits had
been contracted in this quarter; and, by this third article, they are
still more circumscribed. To say that the valley has not been frequented
for six months is a strange reason for adopting this decision. It is
certainly true that Napoleon has for several months declined going out,
in consequence of the harassing conduct of the Governor; but it must
also be observed that one part of the valley is not accessible in rainy
weather, and that in the other part a camp has been formed. Yet Lord
Bathurst stated, in his speech in Parliament, that “this road had been
prohibited, when it was found that he (General Bonaparte) had abused the
confidence which had been reposed in him, and had endeavoured to corrupt
the inhabitants of the island.” But here Lord Bathurst contradicts Sir
Hudson Lowe. The offer of permission to ride in the valley, whenever it
may be wished, is a mere pretence; the forms prescribed for the
attainment of this permission render it impossible. This offer never has
been, and never can be, fulfilled. The ride in the valley being thus
prohibited, it has become impossible to visit Miss Mason’s garden, in
which there are some large trees which afford agreeable shade. Within
the boundaries to which the captives are now restricted, there is not a
single spot in which they can enjoy the sight of trees or water:
sentinels are posted at different distances throughout the boundaries;
and, under the pretence of misunderstanding in the orders, &c., any
individual may be arrested. This has frequently happened to the French
officers.

“4th. If he (General Bonaparte) should wish to prolong his ride in any
other directions, an officer of the Governor’s staff (if he receives
timely notice) will be in readiness to attend him. If the notice should
be short, the officer on duty at Longwood may take the place of the
staff-officer.

“The inspecting officer has orders not to approach General Bonaparte, at
least unless he be asked for; and not to watch him in his rides, except
so far as his duty requires; that is to say, he must observe that the
established rules are not violated; and if they should be transgressed,
he must intimate the circumstance in a respectful way”

OBSERVATION. This regulation is useless. The Emperor will not go out so
long as he sees there is a wish to subject him to direct and public
inspection. Besides, the staff-officers have orders to report all that
the French may say when in conversation with them. This affords
opportunities for calumny. Several English officers have refused to act
this dishonourable part, declaring that they would not degrade
themselves to the level of spies, and repeat the conversations that may
take place in the unguarded confidence of a ride or walk.

“5th. The rules already in force, for preventing communications with any
one whatever, without the Governor’s permission, must be strictly
enforced. Consequently, it is requisite that General Bonaparte should
abstain from entering into any conversation (except such as the
interchange of customary salutations may demand) with the persons whom
he may happen to meet, unless it be in the presence of an English
officer.“

OBSERVATION.—Hitherto this extremity of insult had been avoided. The
Emperor does not acknowledge, either in the Governor or his agents, the
right of imposing any restrictions on him. But what is the object of
this article? To insult and degrade the character of the captives!—to
give rise to disputes between them and the sentinels. To prohibit them
from speaking to any one, or entering any house, is, in fact, a moral
annulment of the circuit allowed them. This is so extraordinary that we
are now actually induced to believe, what many persons have already
suspected, that Sir Hudson Lowe is occasionally subject to fits of
lunacy.

“6th.—Those persons who, with the consent of General Bonaparte, may
receive the Governor’s permission to visit him, must not communicate
with any individual of his suite, unless a permission to that effect be
specially expressed.”

OBSERVATION.—This is useless; for nobody has been received since the
present Governor abolished the regulations which were established by his
predecessor. However, the consequence of this restriction is that, if
Napoleon should receive a stranger, as none of his officers can be
present, and none of his servants in attendance, he would be reduced to
the necessity of opening the doors himself. Besides, as the Emperor does
not understand English, it follows, if the individual admitted to him
should not speak French, that they must both remain mute, and thus the
interview would be reduced to a mere exhibition.

“7th.—At sunset, the garden round Longwood is to be regarded as the
extent of the boundaries. At that time sentinels will be posted at the
limits of the garden; but so as not to incommode General Bonaparte by
observing his motions, should he wish to continue his walks. During the
night, sentinels will be stationed close to the house, as they formerly
were; and all admission must be prohibited until the sentinels are
withdrawn from the house and garden on the following morning.”

OBSERVATION.—During the excessively hot season, the only time when it is
possible to walk is after sun-set. In order to avoid meeting the
sentinels, the Emperor finds it necessary to return to the house while
it is still broad day-light; though the heat of the sun has rendered it
impossible for him to go out during the day, as the grounds round
Longwood are without shade, water, or verdure. According to this new
restriction, the Emperor cannot enjoy a walk in the evening; while he is
likewise deprived of the exercise of riding on horseback. He is confined
in a small house, in all respects insufficient for his accommodation,
badly built, unwholesomely situated, and without a supply of water; and,
in addition to all this, every opportunity is taken to expose him to
insult and disrespect. His constitution, though naturally robust, is
very much enfeebled by the treatment he experiences.

“8th.—Every letter for Longwood will be enclosed by the Governor in a
sealed envelope, and forwarded to the officer on duty, to be delivered,
sealed, to the officer of General Bonaparte’s suite to whom it is
addressed, who by this means will be assured that nobody except the
Governor knows its contents.

“In like manner, letters from any of the residents of Longwood must be
delivered to the officer on duty, enclosed in a second sealed envelope
and addressed to the Governor, which will be a security that no
individual except the latter can peruse its contents.

“No letter can be written or sent, and no communication of any kind
whatever can be made, except in the manner above mentioned. No
correspondence can be maintained with any individual in the island,
except for the necessary communications to the purveyor. The notes
containing these communications must be delivered open to the officer on
duty, who will forward them to the proper quarter.

“The above-mentioned restrictions will be observed from the date of the
10th inst.

                                                          “H. LOWE.“

“_St. Helena, October 9th, 1816._“

OBSERVATION.—This last restriction has no reference to the Emperor, who
neither writes nor receives letters. A simple explanation is, therefore,
all that is required. Will the observations that may be contained in the
confidential letters from the Emperor’s officers to their friends be
regarded as offensive? When those who may read these letters shall be
convinced that they are in no way hostile to the safety or policy of the
state, will they forget their contents, so that they may never become
the subject of conversation or abuse? This explanation will decide
whether all correspondence is, or is not, to be considered as
prohibited. The seizure of the person of Count Las Cases completely
justifies this observation.

The object of the 8th article of the restrictions, as the inquisitorial
system established on the island sufficiently proves, is to prevent the
European journals from giving publicity to the criminal conduct that is
pursued here. A vast deal of trouble is taken to secure this object: it
would have been far easier to have acted in such a way as to render
concealment unnecessary. A letter addressed to Count Bertrand, dated the
1st of July, 1816, goes to still greater lengths; for it prohibits even
verbal communications with the inhabitants of the island. This is the
delirium of fury and hatred; or rather, it may be said to be a proof of
downright madness. The regulation here alluded to is but a trifling
example of the vexations to which we are exposed, and the invention of
which seems to be the sole occupation of the present Governor. Can Lord
Bathurst now affirm that Sir H. Lowe has imposed no restriction; that
the instructions of the English ministry were of a nature advantageous
to Napoleon and his suite, and had no other object than that of securing
their safe custody? In consequence of this absurd and insulting
treatment, the Emperor has not enjoyed exercise without doors for
several months. His medical attendants foresee that this confinement
will prove fatal to his constitution. It is a more certain, and far more
inhuman, mode of assassination, than poison or the sword. [What a
horrible prophecy!]

ANXIETY OCCASIONED BY THE NEW RESTRICTIONS.—ANECDOTES OF
  CAMPO-FORMIO.—MM. DE COBENTZEL, GALLO, AND CLARKE.—THE COUNT
  D’ANTRAIGUES.

10th.—This morning we had agreed to meet together at the Grand
Marshal’s, to deliberate on the restrictions which the Governor had
recently transmitted to us, and to adopt a uniform resolution. I was
unwell, and could not attend. I, however, wrote down my opinion: I
stated that in the delicate situation in which I was placed I could do
nothing; I could arrive at no positive conclusion; I always found 0—0.

The point in question was, indeed, of the most serious and difficult
nature. We were required to subject ourselves to new restrictions, to
place ourselves under the dependence of the Governor, who shamefully
abused his power, employed the most insulting language towards the
Emperor, and announced that we must submit to every grievance, under
pain of being immediately separated from Napoleon, sent to the Cape, and
thence to Europe.

On the other hand, the Emperor, indignant at the mortifications to which
we were exposed on his account, insisted that we should no longer submit
to them. He urged us rather to quit him, and to return to Europe, to
bear witness that we had seen him absolutely buried alive.

But how could we for a moment endure this thought! Death was preferable
to separation from him whom we served, admired, and loved; to whom we
daily became more and more attached, through his personal qualities, and
the miseries which injustice and hatred had accumulated upon him. This
was the real state of the question. In these distressing circumstances,
we knew not what determination to adopt. I closed my letter by stating
that, if left to myself alone, I would sign, without scruple, any thing
that the Governor might present to me; and that, if a collective
resolution were taken, I would implicitly adopt it.

The Governor had now found out a method of attacking us in detail: he
declared his intention of removing any individual of Napoleon’s suite
according to his will and caprice.

The Emperor was indisposed: the Doctor has observed incipient scurvy. He
desired me to attend him, and we conversed on the subjects which chiefly
occupied our attention at the moment. He wanted something to amuse him,
and he took up the chapter of Leoben, which happened to be beside him.
When he had finished reading it, the conversation turned on the
conferences which brought about the treaty of Campo-Formio. I refer to
the chapters on that subject for the portrait and character of the first
Austrian negotiator, M. de Cobentzel, whom Napoleon surnamed the “_great
northern bear_,” on account of the influence which, he said, his heavy
paw had exercised on the green table of the conferences.

“M. de Cobentzel was at that time,” said the Emperor, “the agent of the
Austrian monarchy, the main spring of its plans, and the director of its
diplomacy. He had been appointed on all the principal European
embassies, and had been long at the Court of Catharine, whose peculiar
favour he enjoyed. Proud of his rank and importance, he doubted not that
his dignified and courtly manners would easily overawe a General who had
just issued from the revolutionary camp. Thus,” observed Napoleon, “he
shewed a want of respect in addressing the French General; but the first
words uttered by the latter sufficed to reduce him to his proper level,
above which he never afterwards attempted to rise.”

The conferences at first proceeded very slowly; for M. de Cobentzel,
according to the custom of the Austrian Cabinet, proved himself very
skilful in the art of retarding business. The French General, however,
determined to bring matters to an issue: the conference, which he had
declared should be the last, was maintained with great warmth. Napoleon
came, resolved to have a decisive answer to his propositions; they were
rejected. He then rose in a fit of passion, and exclaimed energetically:
“You wish for war then?—You shall have it:” and laying his hands on a
magnificent piece of porcelain (which M. de Cobentzel used with great
complacency to boast of having received as a present from the great
Catharine), he dashed it with all his force on the ground, where it was
broken into a thousand pieces. “There,” he exclaimed, “such, I promise
you, will be the fate of your Austrian monarchy in less than three
months:” and so saying, he rushed out of the apartment. M. de Cobentzel
stood petrified; but M. de Gallo, who was of a more conciliatory temper,
followed the French General to his carriage, endeavouring to detain him.
“He almost dragged me back by main force,” said the Emperor, “and with
so pitiable an air, that, in spite of my apparent anger, I could not
refrain from laughing in my sleeve.”

M. de Gallo was the ambassador from Naples to Vienna, whither he had
conducted the Neapolitan Princess, the second wife of the Emperor
Francis. He possessed the full confidence of the Princess, and she, in
her turn, ruled her husband: thus the ambassador enjoyed great influence
at the Court of Vienna. When the army of Italy, marching on Vienna,
dictated the armistice of Leoben, the Empress, at this critical
juncture, cast her eyes on her confident, and charged him to avert the
danger. He was to gain an interview with the French General, as if
accidentally, and to endeavour to prevail on him to accept his services
as a negotiator. Napoleon, who was well acquainted with every
circumstance, determined to turn his knowledge to a good account.
Accordingly, on receiving M. de Gallo, he inquired who he was. The
favourite courtier, disconcerted to find himself under the necessity of
telling his name, replied that he was the Marquess de Gallo, and that he
had been charged by the Emperor of Austria to make overtures to
Napoleon. “But,” said the latter, “your name is not German.” “True,”
replied M. de Gallo,” I am the Neapolitan ambassador.” “And how happens
it,” said Napoleon drily, “that I have to treat with Naples? We are at
peace. Has the Emperor of Austria no negotiators of the old school? Is
the old aristocracy of Vienna extinct?” M. de Gallo, alarmed at the idea
of such observations being officially communicated to the Cabinet of
Vienna, now became intent on ingratiating himself into the favour of the
young General.

Napoleon enquired what news had been received from Vienna, and spoke of
the armies of the Rhine, the Sambre, and the Meuse. He obtained all the
intelligence he could; and, when he was about to withdraw, M. de Gallo,
in the most suppliant tone, inquired whether he might hope to be
accepted as a negotiator, and whether he should proceed to Vienna to
obtain full powers. Napoleon had no wish to decline this proposal; he
had gained an advantage which he was not willing to lose. M. de Gallo,
who subsequently became ambassador from Naples to the First Consul, and
also ambassador from Joseph to the Emperor Napoleon, frequently
mentioned this scene, and frankly avowed that he had never been so
frightened in the whole course of his life.

In the French negotiations, Clarke acted the same kind of secondary part
which M. de Gallo maintained with regard to Austria. “Clarke,” said the
Emperor, “had been sent to Italy by the Directory, which had begun to
consider me as dangerous. He was charged with an ostensible and public
mission; but he had secret orders to keep an eye upon me, and to
ascertain if, in case of necessity, it would be possible to arrest me.
But little reliance could have been placed on the officers of my army,
in an affair of this kind, and therefore the first inquiries were
addressed to the Cisalpine Directory. The answer was that it would be as
well to spare trouble on this point, and to give up all idea of it. As
soon as I was made acquainted with Clarke’s real instructions, I frankly
told him all I knew; at the same time assuring him that I should concern
myself but very little about any reports that might be made. He was soon
convinced of this. When, on his mission to Austria, he was dismissed, by
that Power, I offered to find employment for him, and he afterwards
remained with me; though perhaps there was, in reality, but little
sympathy between us. I should undoubtedly have again taken him into my
service, after my return, if I had found him in the ranks along with the
rest. You know that I could not easily rid myself of those to whom I had
become accustomed: when people had once embarked with me, I could never
prevail on myself to throw them overboard. Nothing but absolute
necessity could force me to such a course. Clarke’s chief merit was that
of being a good man of business.”

After Brumaire, Clarke naturally came in contact with the First Consul
as his aid-de-camp, &c. There was then little etiquette observed at the
palace; the duties were not distinctly separated, and the whole
presented a kind of family circle. The officers immediately connected
with the Consul dined at a general table. Clarke, who was extremely
susceptible and punctilious, got involved in quarrels with one of these
persons. The circumstance having reached the ears of the First Consul,
he appointed Clarke ambassador to Florence, to the court of the Queen of
Etruria. This post was in itself highly agreeable; but Clarke had been
appointed to it by way of disgrace. He urgently solicited his recal;
and, at length, to his great satisfaction, he received an order to
return to France. But his punishment was not yet at an end. The First
Consul took but little notice of him: he sent him to the Tuileries, to
St. Cloud, and to the camp of Boulogne, without explaining his
intentions, or granting him any thing. Clarke, in despair, told one of
his friends that he had no alternative but to throw himself into the
Seine, as he could no longer endure the contempt to which he was
exposed, added to the mortification of being deprived of his situation.
Just at this time he was unexpectedly made Secretary of the
Topographical Cabinet, Councillor of State, and appointed to some other
posts, which altogether produced him a salary of 60 or 80,000 francs.
This was Napoleon’s way: his first favour was usually followed
immediately by several others. In these cases his bounty was
overwhelming. But it was necessary to take advantage of the interval of
favour; it might be endless, or it might be instantly and irretrievably
lost.

I knew General Clarke well; he had been my comrade at the Military
School. He informed me that, some days before the battle of Jena, the
Emperor, from whose dictation he had just written numerous orders and
instructions, entering into a familiar conversation, while he walked up
and down his chamber, said: “In three or four days I will fight a
battle, which I shall gain: it will bring me at least as far as the
Elbe, and perhaps to the Vistula. There I will fight a second battle,
which I shall also gain. Then ... then ...,” said he, with a meditative
air, and placing his hand on his forehead ... “but that is enough; it is
useless to invent romances,—Clarke, in a month you will be Governor of
Berlin; and history will record that, in the space of one year, and in
two different wars, you were Governor of Vienna and Berlin; that is to
say, of the Austrian and Prussian monarchies. By the bye,” continued he,
smiling, “what did Francis give you for governing his capital?”—“Nothing
at all, Sire.”—“How, nothing at all?—That was hard indeed! Well, in that
case, I must pay his debt.” And he gave him, as far as I can recollect,
a sum sufficient to purchase an hotel in Paris, or a country house in
the vicinity of the capital.

The course of events exceeded even Napoleon’s expectations. He fought
but one battle, which brought him to Berlin, and enabled him to advance
to the Vistula.

“Clarke,” said Napoleon, “possessed a strong taste for family
parchments. At Florence he spent a great portion of his time in
investigating my genealogy. He also took great pains to trace out his
own, and I believe he at length persuaded himself that he was related to
the whole Faubourg Saint-Germain. Doubtless he has a much higher opinion
of his own dignity, now that he is the Minister of a legitimate King
than he had when he was merely the Minister of an upstart Emperor. It is
said that he at present enjoys great favour; I wish it may last. It
commenced a few days before my arrival at Paris, when the cause of the
King was desperate. It certainly appeared useless to accept a ministry
when all was lost; but I have nothing to say against that. This sort of
conduct may have its fair side; yet it is necessary to observe some
degree of decorum, and in that Clarke was wholly wanting. However, I
willingly forgive him in all that concerns me.... In 1813 and 1814 some
persons endeavoured to inspire me with doubts of Clarke’s fidelity; but
I never would listen to any thing of the kind. I always believed him to
be an honest man.” The intimate friends of the Duke de Feltre can bear
witness that Napoleon was correct in the opinion he had formed of the
character of his minister.

The Duke de Feltre, on communicating to the Emperor the intelligence of
the arrival of the Count d’Artois in Switzerland, advised him to make
peace. Napoleon replied, under date of 22d of February, 1814:—“As to
your advice of making peace, it is too absurd: it is by cherishing such
notions as this that public spirit is destroyed. Besides, it is
supposing me either mad or stupid to imagine that, if I could conclude
peace, I would not immediately do it. To the prevailing notion that it
has been in my power to make peace for four months past, but that I
declined doing so, must be attributed all the misfortunes of France. I
expected, at least, to have been spared the pain of hearing such
sentiments expressed.”

The Emperor, reverting to the events of Campo-Formio, alluded to the
arrest of the Count d’Antraigues, the papers that were found upon him,
and the discoveries to which they gave rise; he also mentioned the
indulgence which the Count experienced, and the treachery with which
that indulgence was repaid.

The Count d’Antraigues, who was a man of considerable talent, fond of
intrigue, and endowed with personal advantages, had acquired a certain
degree of importance at the commencement of our Revolution. He was a
member of the right hand side of the Constituent Assembly, and he
emigrated at the time of its dissolution. At the period when the French
were about to assail Venice, the Count d’Antraigues was residing there,
where he held a diplomatic appointment from the Russian Government, and
was the main spring and agent of all the machinations that were plotting
against France. On seeing the danger of the Venetian Republic, he
attempted to escape; but he fell in with one of our posts, and was
seized, with all his papers. The General-in-chief appointed a special
commission to examine these documents, and the secrets which they
unfolded were the subject of great astonishment. They contained, among
other things, full proof of the treason of Pichegru, who had sacrificed
his troops to facilitate the operations of the enemy. “Pichegru,”
exclaimed the Emperor indignantly, “was guilty of the most odious crime
that can possibly be conceived, that of coldly sacrificing the men whose
lives had been entrusted to his honour and discretion.”

The Count d’Antraigues, finding that all his secrets were discovered,
conducted himself with so much address and apparent candour, that
Napoleon, conceiving he had gained him over, or, to speak more properly,
suffering himself to be gained over by the Count, treated him with the
utmost indulgence. He defended him against the proceedings of the
Directory, which insisted on having him shot, and the Count was allowed
to proceed to Milan on his parole. But what was Napoleon’s surprise on
learning that M. d‘Antraigues had escaped to Switzerland, and had
published an infamous libel against him, reproaching him with
ill-treatment, and complaining of having been confined in chains? These
falsehoods occasioned so much indignation that several foreign
diplomatists, who knew how Napoleon had really acted towards the Count,
spontaneously made a public declaration of what they had witnessed.

So late as the year 1814, the Count d‘Antraigues died in England, in a
horrible way, being assassinated by his valet-de-chambre in the presence
of his wife, who was the celebrated singer Saint Huberti.

At the time of the seizure of the Count d‘Antraigues‘ papers, Pichegru
was at the head of the Legislative Body, and was almost at open war with
the Directory. It may well be supposed that the members of the Directory
were highly gratified by thus obtaining important and authentic
documents against their adversaries. This discovery greatly influenced
Napoleon in the course which he adopted in the events of Fructidor: it
was one of the principal causes of his famous proclamation, which
brought about the triumph of the Directory.

Desaix, who was serving under Moreau in the army of the Rhine, having
taken advantage of the armistice to introduce himself to the
General-in-chief of the army of Italy, for whom he had conceived the
highest admiration, was with Napoleon at the time of the important
discovery above mentioned. Napoleon having informed him of the treason
of Pichegru, Desaix observed; “But we knew all this on the Rhine three
months ago. A waggon, belonging to General Klinglin’s corps, which fell
into our hands, furnished us with all Pichegru’s correspondence with the
enemies of the Republic.”—“And did Moreau give no intimation of this to
the Directory?” “No.”—“Then he is very blameable,” exclaimed Napoleon;
“when the safety of one’s country is at stake silence is guilt!” After
Pichegru’s fall, Moreau communicated to the Directory all he knew
respecting the conspiracy, at the same time pronouncing a severe
reprobation on those who were concerned in it. “This was but another
instance of misconduct,” said Napoleon; “by not speaking earlier, he
betrayed his country; and by speaking so late, he merely struck a blow
at one who was already fallen.”

                          THE EMPEROR’S DREAM.

11th—12th. The produce of the sale of a portion of plate, amounting to
6000 francs, was this day received. This sum the Emperor considered
indispensible to make up our deficiencies at the expiration of every
month; and he ordered the sale to be repeated regularly.

The Emperor continues very ill, and is in very low spirits. To-day he
did not leave his room until dinner-time. He conversed very little, and
did not apply himself to any kind of occupation. I remained with him the
greater part of the day. He spoke frequently of the situation in which
we stood with respect to the Governor, and made some very remarkable
observations on that subject. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

After dinner he mentioned a dream which he had had during the night. A
lady with whom he had been but little acquainted (Madame Clarke, Duchess
de Feltre) appeared to him in his dream, and told him she was dead, at
the same time adding several observations which were expressed in
language perfectly connected and intelligible. “Every thing was so clear
and distinct,” said the Emperor, “that it has made a forcible impression
on me; so much so that if I were really to hear of the death of the
Duchess de Feltre, I must confess that my established ideas would be
shaken; and perhaps,” said he, smiling and looking at one of the
company, “I too should become a believer in dreams and apparitions.”

The Emperor ate little; his spirits were depressed, and he was evidently
very ill. He retired almost immediately, and his manner affected us
greatly. We could not help remarking how much he was altered.

           PRIVATIONS TO WHICH THE EMPEROR IS SUBJECTED.—HIS
                        CLAIMS ON PRINCE EUGENE.

13th.—The Emperor came to me about ten o’clock. He looked in at my
room-door, and blamed me for not having risen earlier. He found me using
the foot-bath for I was not well. I soon joined him beneath the tent,
where he wished to breakfast. He told me he had given orders for drawing
up some notes relative to the new restrictions, to prevent condemnation
being passed on us without a sort of responsibility being attached to
those who passed the sentence. He then proceeded to calculate the lots
of plate which remain to be sold, and the period during which they would
serve to maintain us. I repeated the offers which I have already several
times made, telling him that it was hard he should be reduced to the
necessity of disposing of his plate; but he replied,—“My dear Las Cases,
under whatever circumstances I may be placed, those articles of luxury
are never of any importance to me; and as far as regards others, that is
to say, as far as regards the public, simplicity will always be my best
ornament.” He added that he could, after all, claim the assistance of
Prince Eugène; and that he was even inclined to write to him for the
loans which would be necessary for his subsistence when the plate should
be exhausted. He also expressed his intention of commissioning Eugène to
forward to him some important books which he wished to have sent from
London, together with a small quantity of choice wine, which it was
necessary he should take as a medicine. “This commission for wine,” said
he, will make our enemies in Europe say that we think of nothing here
but eating and drinking.” He said that he should feel no hesitation in
addressing himself on this subject to Eugène, who owed to him every
thing he possessed; and that it would be insulting the character of the
Prince to doubt his readiness to serve him, particularly as he had,
besides, a legal claim upon him for about ten or twelve millions.

While we were at breakfast, the Emperor sent for the Pole, who is soon
to leave us. After breakfast he wished to employ himself in reading or
dictating; but he felt very drowsy, and fell asleep several times. He
retired to his chamber, to lie down for a while, desiring me to attend
him at one o’clock for his English lesson. But when the appointed hour
arrived, he was still in the same state of drowsiness; and he only
succeeded in rousing himself by taking a bath, in which, according to
custom, he remained for a long time. It is surprising that this
practice, joined to that of taking very hot baths, does not prove
injurious to him.

The Emperor ate but little dinner, and he complained of not enjoying
regular and sound rest. He conversed for some time on the subject of
balloons, and laughed at those biographical notices which represent him
as having forced himself, sword in hand, into the balloon of the
military school. He mentioned, as a sort of prodigy, the circumstance of
the balloon which ascended at his coronation having fallen, in the space
of a few hours, in the neighbourhood of Rome, bearing intelligence of
the ceremony to the inhabitants of that city.

The Emperor took up Don Quixote; but he closed the book in about half an
hour: he cannot now apply himself to reading for a longer interval. His
health visibly declines. He often observes to me that we are both
growing very old, and that he is much the older of the two: these words
tell a great deal.

THE REQUIRED DECLARATION IS SENT TO THE GOVERNOR.—THE EMPEROR REMARKS
  THAT MANY MODERN BOOKS ARE MERELY BOOKSELLERS‘ SPECULATIONS.—FALSE
  NOTIONS CREATED BY PARTY SPIRIT.—GENERAL MAISON.

14th.—To-day the Grand Marshal forwarded to the Governor the new
declarations which he required us to make. They were all alike, and were
as follows:

“I, the undersigned, hereby declare that I wish to remain at St. Helena,
and to share the restrictions which are imposed on the Emperor Napoleon
personally.”

About one o’clock I went to attend the Emperor in his chamber. I gave
him an account of some private commissions. He was reading a work on
the government of France. He thought it very indifferent, and observed
that, since he had been in the habit of perusing new publications, he
had found them, for the most part, to be merely matters of
speculation,—things got up for sale by booksellers. The world, he
said, was now threatened with a deluge of bad books, and he saw no
remedy that could effectually counteract so great an evil.

After having dressed, the Emperor repaired to the drawing-room, where he
looked over a few English newspapers, and read some lines of Telemachus.
But he felt fatigued and low-spirited, and suspended his reading. We
discoursed on several subjects which intimately concerned the Emperor,
who closed the conversation by several times repeating,—“_Poor human
nature!_”

During another interval of conversation, Napoleon, taking a review of
several well-known individuals, on whom he pronounced his opinion,
alluded to one, whom he represented as being a most immoral and base
character. I happened to be acquainted with this person, and I observed
that I knew him to be quite the reverse of what I had just heard
described. I was defending the individual in question with considerable
warmth when the Emperor interrupted me, saying: “I give full credit to
what you say; but I had heard a different account of him: and though I
generally made it a rule to hear things of this kind with suspicion, yet
you see I could not always avoid retaining some impression of what I
heard. Was this my fault? When I had no particular motive for inquiry,
how could I arrive at the knowledge of facts? This,” continued he, “is
the inevitable consequence of civil commotions: there are always two
reputations between the two parties. What absurdities, what ridiculous
stories, are related of the individuals who figured in our
Revolution![33] The saloons of Paris are full of them. I have had my
full share of this kind of scandal. After me who can have any right to
complain? Yet I protest that nothing of this sort ever produced any
influence on my mind, or occasioned me in any instance to alter my
determinations, &c.”

Footnote 33:

  I take this opportunity of correcting an error of the nature here
  alluded to. In a preceding part of this work, it is stated that M.
  Monge ascended the Jacobinical tribune, &c. The friends and relatives
  of that distinguished man have, however, assured me that all who knew
  him at the time in question can bear witness that he never appeared
  among them, and that he never spoke in any public assembly. I feel
  pleasure in mentioning this circumstance; for nothing affords me
  greater happiness than to be the means of developing truth.

After alluding to several military officers, the Emperor mentioned
General Maison. “His manœuvres,” said he, “round Lille, in the crisis
of 1814, attracted my attention, and fixed him in my recollection. He
was not with us in 1815. What became of him? Where was he at that
time?”—I could not answer these questions, as I did not know the
General.

DIFFICULTIES STARTED BY THE GOVERNOR RESPECTING OUR DECLARATIONS.—THE
  EMPEROR’S SENTIMENTS ON THAT SUBJECT.—THE GOVERNOR’S CONVERSATION
  WITH EACH INDIVIDUAL OF THE EMPEROR’S SUITE.—NAPOLEON’S
  REMARK.—CONSUMMATION OF OUR SLAVERY.

15th. For some time past I have found it impossible to sleep; and I have
passed whole nights without closing my eyes. About eight o’clock this
morning, as I was endeavouring to compose myself to rest, the Grand
Marshal entered my chamber, to inform me that the Governor had sent back
our declarations, and was coming himself to oblige us to sign that which
he had sent as a model, and which differed from ours only with respect
to the title which we gave to the Emperor. It was wished that we should
designate him merely by the name _Bonaparte_.

The Grand Marshal proceeded to the Emperor’s apartments, whither I was
almost immediately summoned. On entering, I found the Emperor walking
about and expressing himself with great warmth. All the individuals of
the suite were assembled together. “The insults,” said he, “which are
daily heaped upon those who have devoted themselves to me, insults
which, it is very probable, will be multiplied to a still greater
extent, present a spectacle which I cannot and must not longer endure.
Gentlemen, you must leave me; I cannot see you submit to the
restrictions which are about to be imposed on you, and which will
doubtless soon be augmented. I will remain here alone. Return to Europe,
and make known the horrible treatment to which I am exposed; bear
witness that you saw me sinking into a premature grave. I will not allow
any one of you to sign this declaration in the form that is required. I
forbid it. It shall never be said that hands which I had the power to
command were employed in recording my degradation. If obstacles are
raised respecting a mere foolish formality, others will be started
to-morrow for an equally trivial cause. It is determined to remove you
in detail; but I would rather see you removed altogether and at once.
Perhaps this sacrifice may produce a result.” With these words he
dismissed us, and we withdrew overwhelmed with dismay.

In a few moments the Emperor again sent for me. He was walking up and
down, through the whole length of his two little rooms. There was a
peculiar tenderness in the tone of his voice, and I never observed more
easy familiarity in his manner. “Well, my dear Las Cases,” said he, “I
am going to turn hermit,” “Sire,” said I, “are you not one already? What
resources does our society present to you? We can only offer you prayers
and good wishes; which, though they can contribute but little to your
consolation, are every thing to us. Our present situation is the most
distressing that can possibly be conceived; for, in the question under
consideration, we now perhaps, for the first time, find it difficult to
obey your Majesty. You hold the language of reason; while we are guided
only by sentiment. The arguments which you just now addressed to us
admit of no reply. Your determination is in unison with your character;
it will astonish no one, but its execution is beyond our power. The
thought of leaving you here alone exceeds in horror all that our
imagination can picture.”—“Such, however, is my fate,“ replied the
Emperor calmly, “and I must prepare for the worst: my mind is strong
enough to meet it. They will cut short my life; that is
certain.”—“Sire,” I observed, “the step which you command is not to be
thought of. To the last moment I will speak out as your Majesty has
done: on this point I will resist to the utmost; but I shall find it
impossible to act as I speak.”

The Emperor seated himself, and desired me to sit down beside him. He
observed that he was much fatigued; and he ordered breakfast, desiring
me to stay with him. For a considerable time past, I had not been in the
habit of dining with him; he told me the reason why I had been denied
this happiness; and I considered it as a favour that he should
condescend to tell me. When the coffee was brought in, there was no cup
for me. Marchand was going to fetch one; but the Emperor called him
back, saying: “Take that one from the mantel-piece: he shall drink out
of my handsome gold cup.”[34]

Footnote 34:

  This was the cup belonging to his dressing-table, which stood on the
  chimney-piece as an ornament.

  I have now the happiness of possessing the saucer belonging to this
  cup. M. Marchand, that faithful servant, to whom Napoleon declared
  himself so much attached, on his return from St. Helena, came and
  presented this saucer to me, in a manner that forcibly roused my
  gratitude and sensibility. “The beautiful cup,” said he, “out of which
  you sometimes drank, belonged to the Emperor’s dressing-table, and was
  accordingly restored to its place. The saucer, however, among other
  articles, fell to my share; and I now present it to you, being assured
  that you will feel as much pleasure in receiving as I have in giving
  it.”

Just as breakfast was over, the Grand Marshal entered and told us that
the Governor had arrived, and had expressed a wish to see him at his
(Bertrand‘s) new house, which is a very short distance from our
establishment, and is at length on the point of being completed. The
Emperor desired him to attend the Governor. The Grand Marshal, as he was
about to withdraw, seemed desirous to know whether the Emperor still
persisted in the orders he had given us this morning, in case the
Governor should not yield. The Emperor sharply observed: “I am not a
child; when I have once thoroughly considered a question, I no longer
entertain two opinions upon it. I have directed battles which have
decided the fate of empires, and the orders I issued were always the
result of my mature deliberation. In this instance I am alone concerned.
Go!”

The Grand Marshal soon returned with an account of the interview, which
he had closed by his refusal. The Governor, he said, had desired to see
the other three persons of the suite together; but we thought that it
would be more proper to present ourselves in succession.

I went to wait on the Governor. I found him, surrounded by several of
his attendants, in the garden, near the path leading to the Grand
Marshal’s house. He withdrew on perceiving me; but I joined him in the
court before the house.

As he had expressed himself very much irritated against me, I went as
well fortified as I possibly could. He, however, conducted me with great
politeness into the house, leaving the officers of his suite on the
outside; and, having told me that he awaited the arrival of Messrs. de
Montholon and Gourgaud, to enter upon the business, I asked him whether
he had any objection to treat immediately with me. He replied that he
had not; and, calling in his officers, he told me, in their presence,
that I had no doubt learned from the Grand Marshal what he had to
propose on the subject of my declaration. I replied in the affirmative,
at the same time observing that I regarded the Grand Marshal as my model
and guide, on account of his rank, as well as the respect and esteem I
entertained for him, and therefore it was natural to expect that my
answer should correspond with his. I added that I could not conceive why
so much importance was attached to a mere matter of form, which was so
painful to our feelings, while it could be of no service to those who
insisted on it. “It is out of my power,” said the Governor, “to make the
alteration you wish. I am directed to present to you for signature the
declaration written in my hand: now I, being an Englishman, cannot write
the title you wish.”—“I was not aware of that,” replied I; “to that
argument I have no reply to make. You, as an Englishman, must write
thus; but I, being a Frenchman, must sign in my language; that is to
say, with the translation from yours. Allow me, therefore, to add to my
signature any phrase that you may think proper to dictate to me, in
which I can express myself in my own language. You may now judge,” added
I, “whether I deal candidly, and whether I seek to create difficulties.”
This proposal seemed to claim his attention. “We are now,” I continued,
“merely disputing about words, which may appear very silly, considering
the important circumstances in which we are placed; but, Sir, who
created these difficulties? Who will suffer from them? Your refusal
places us in a most distressing situation! You see me reduced to the
utmost despair! To me separation from the Emperor would be worse than
death; yet I would rather submit to it than suffer my hand to be the
instrument of his degradation. The Emperor unites in himself all that
constitutes an august character, in the eyes of God and man: to deny
this would be to deny the light of the sun.”

The Governor observed that he, as an Englishman, could not acknowledge
the Emperor; and I replied that I could urge no objection to that. I
added that however much I might be hurt by his mode of designating the
Emperor, yet I did not mean to question his right of using whatever
terms he might think proper; and that, for the same reason, he ought not
to object to my opinions and expressions, considering that I was a
Frenchman, and that he demanded my signature.

Here Sir Hudson Lowe angrily alluded to some past circumstances relating
to himself personally; and he observed that, after all, moral character
was the only real title to respect. “At that rate, Governor,” replied I,
with some warmth, and turning to the Officers who were in attendance,
“the Emperor may divest himself of all his titles, and he will but gain
in the opinion of the world, if his character be estimated by the scale
to which you allude.” The Governor was silent: then, after a pause of a
few moments, he observed that we still treated our General as though he
were an Emperor. “And how can we treat him otherwise?”—“I mean to say,
that you continue to look upon him as a Sovereign.”—“Governor, you talk
of revering him as our Sovereign; we do more—we worship him! We now
consider the Emperor as removed from this world; we view him as though
he were in Heaven!... When you leave us a choice that is in opposition
to him, it is like the choice given to martyrs, when they are commanded
to renounce their faith or die. “Death, therefore, must be our
alternative.” These words produced a visible impression on the officers
who were present, and even on the Governor. Contrary to custom, his
countenance assumed a mild expression, and the tone of his voice was
softened.

“Our situation here,” continued I, “is so horrible as to be almost
beyond endurance. You know this;—but what we now suffer is nothing to
the misery which is reserved for us. What I ask will be no sacrifice to
you, and it will be every thing to us. I implore you to grant what I
request; and this is something, for you know I am not in the habit of
soliciting favours from you. Make but this one concession, and you will
claim my eternal gratitude. Besides, consider that a responsibility
rests with you; that there is a public opinion in Europe, which you may
forfeit without gaining any advantage in return. You cannot be a
stranger to the sentiments which animate me; they must, I am sure, go to
the hearts of all who listen to me.”

Here the Governor appeared somewhat moved; the officers were evidently
affected. Sir Hudson Lowe, after a few moments‘ silence, bowed to me,
and I took my leave.

Messrs. de Montholon and Gourgaud had each an interview in their turn;
and we all four attended the Emperor during his toilet, without,
however, being able to tell him whether any decision had been formed on
the subject that so deeply interested us.

The Emperor expressed a wish to go out, though the wind was extremely
boisterous: we all walked to the extremity of the wood. He took a review
of the Governor’s conduct, making remarks upon it in the rapid and
copious way peculiar to himself; and he concluded by saying that if
to-day we should agree to sign the declaration, in order to avoid being
separated from him, to-morrow another ground of expulsion would be
brought forward; and that he should wish our removal to be effected
forcibly and at once, rather than tranquilly and in detail. Then,
suddenly assuming a tone of pleasantry, he said that, after all, he
could hardly believe the Governor wished to reduce his subjects to one
only; and what sort of subject would that one be! added he—an absolute
porcupine, on which he would not dare to lay a finger.

During our walk, two strangers approached pretty near to us. The Emperor
made some one enquire who they were, and he was informed that they
belonged to a vessel which was about to sail to-morrow for Europe. The
Emperor asked whether they were likely to see any of the Ministers on
their arrival in London; and they replied that they should see Lord
Bathurst. “Tell him,” said Napolean, “that his instructions with respect
to my treatment here are most odious, and that his agent executes them
with scrupulous fidelity. If he wished to get rid of me, he should have
despatched me at a blow, instead of thus killing me by inches. This
conduct is truly barbarous; there is nothing English in it; and I can
only attribute it to some personal hatred. I have too much respect for
the Prince Regent, the majority of the Ministers, and the English
nation, to suppose that they are responsible for my treatment. Be this
as it may, their power extends only to the body; the soul is beyond
their reach: it will soar to Heaven even from the dungeon.”

The Emperor, on his return home, took a bath; he was fatigued and
harassed by the events of the day. He fell asleep, and I watched beside
him, meditating on our new grievances.

At dinner he ate but a little. Some one made an observation, and the
Emperor, not having heard it distinctly, asked what had been said—a
thing which frequently happens. The words were then repeated in a louder
tone, upon which he observed: “I am certainly growing deaf, for I
occasionally miss hearing what is said, and I feel inclined to be angry
when people speak louder than usual.” He concluded the evening by
reading a part of Don Quixote. He was much amused at some comic
passages; and, laying down the book, he remarked that we certainly
showed a great deal of courage, since we could laugh at such trifles
under our present circumstances. He paused for some moments, and seemed
deeply wrapped in thought: then rising, he withdrew, saying: “Adieu, my
dear friends.”

During dinner, a letter had been delivered to me from the Grand Marshal;
but I had kept it concealed, conceiving that it augured no good. I
opened it as soon as the Emperor withdrew. It enclosed a letter from the
Governor, announcing that if we still persisted in our refusal to sign
the declaration, he would immediately give orders for our removal to
Europe. We yielded to the dictates of our hearts: to determine on
leaving the Emperor was beyond our power; while at the same time it
would have been going beyond his wishes, and perhaps too beyond his
orders. With unanimous sentiments, we eagerly signed the declarations in
the form in which they were presented to us, and delivered them to the
English officer on duty at Longwood, together with a letter to the Grand
Marshal, acquainting him with what we had done without his
participation. We had been guided solely by our feelings, and we trusted
that those feelings would afford us consolation, even though the Emperor
should disapprove of the step we had taken.

We have now reached the consummation of our absolute slavery and
dependence on the will and caprice of Sir Hudson Lowe; not merely by the
signature we have just given him, but because he now knows our secret,
and therefore it is in his power to compel us to submit to any thing he
pleases.

ANECDOTES OF SIEYES.—THE EMPEROR FREQUENTLY ATTENDED POPULAR FESTIVITIES
  IN DISGUISE.—HIS VISITS TO THE FAUBOURG SAINT-ANTOINE, AFTER HIS
  RETURN FROM MOSCOW AND FROM THE ISLAND OF ELBA.—MANNERS DURING THE
  TIME OF THE DIRECTORY.—REMARKABLE OFFICIAL NOTE.

16th.—The Emperor sent for me about noon. He had been reading and was
just finishing his coffee. He desired me to sit down, and he entered
into conversation. Not a word escaped him that could lead me to suppose
he knew the determination we had adopted yesterday evening; he made no
allusion to the subject, and it was not mentioned throughout the whole
of the day. After breakfast, the Emperor walked about his apartments.
The turn of the conversation introduced some anecdotes of former times,
of which Sieyes was the subject. The Emperor related that while Sieyes
was chaplain to the Princes of Orleans, being one day engaged in
performing mass, something unexpectedly occasioned the Princes to
withdraw during the service; upon which the Abbé, looking up and seeing
only the valets present, immediately closed his book, observing that he
was not engaged to perform mass to the rabble.

“Your Majesty,” said I, “was the first who made me acquainted with the
name and person of Sieyes. A few days after my presentation at Court,
your Majesty, at one of your audiences, having passed by me, stopped to
speak to the person who stood next to me, addressing him by name. All my
emigrant prejudices were yet in full force and I thought myself polluted
by coming in contact with one whom I regarded as an absolute monster,
and whom I had never heard mentioned except as an object of the
bitterest imprecation.” “Doubtless,” said the Emperor, “you were
thinking of the _mort sans phrase_. But I have heard it affirmed that
Sieyes denied that.”

I now repeated an anecdote which used to be circulated in the Faubourg
Saint-Germain, and on which, the first time I related it, the Emperor
made no observation. Sieyes was described as having used the epithet
_tyrant_ in speaking of Louis XVI., to which Napoleon was said to have
replied, “Monsieur l‘Abbé, if he had been a tyrant, I should not be
here, and you would still be performing mass.” “I might have thought
so,” said the Emperor, on my relating this anecdote for the second time;
“but I should certainly not have been fool enough to say so. This is one
of the absurd stories invented in the drawing-rooms of Paris. I never
committed blunders of that kind: my object was to extinguish, and not to
feed, the flame. The torrent of hostility was already too forcibly
directed against certain leaders of the Revolution. I found it necessary
to support and countenance them; and I did so. Some one having
procured—God knows where—a bust of Sieyes in his ecclesiastical
character, it was publickly exhibited, and occasioned a universal
uproar. Sieyes, in a furious passion, set out to make a complaint to me;
but I had already given the necessary reprimand, and the bust was again
consigned to obscurity.

“My great principle was to guard against re-action, and to bury the past
in oblivion. I never condemned any opinion, or proscribed any act. I was
surrounded by the men who had voted for the death of Louis XVI.: they
were in the Ministry, and in the Council of State. I did not approve of
their doctrines; but what had I to do with them? what right had I to
constitute myself their judge?” Some had been actuated by conviction,
others by weakness and terror, and all by the delirium and fury of the
moment. The fatality of the Greek tragedy was exemplified in the life of
Louis XVI.”

I told the Emperor that it was reported in the Faubourg Saint-Germain
that Sieyes had been detected in a conspiracy against him, in the affair
of M. Clement de Ris; and that he (Napoleon) had pardoned him, on
condition of his entirely withdrawing himself from any participation in
political affairs. “This is another idle story, for which there is not
the slightest foundation,” said the Emperor. “Sieyes was always attached
to me, and I never had any cause to complain of him. He was probably
vexed to find that I opposed his metaphysical ideas; but he was at
length convinced that it was necessary for France to have a ruler, and
he preferred me to any other. Sieyes was, after all, an honest and a
very clever man: he did much for the Revolution.”

The Emperor mentioned that at one of the first public festivals that
took place during the Consulate, as he was viewing the illuminations
in company with Sieyes, he asked him what he thought of the state of
affairs. Sieyes replied in a cold and even a disheartening tone. “And
yet,” resumed Napoleon, “I had this morning very satisfactory proofs
of the spirit of the people.”—“It is seldom,” replied Sieyes, “that
the people shew their real spirit, when the man who is possessed of
power presents himself to their gaze. I can assure you they are far
from being satisfied.”—“Then you do not think the present government
firmly established?”—“No.”—“And when do you suppose we shall be
settled?“—“When I see the Dukes and Marquises of the old court in your
ante-chamber.“—“Sieyes,” added the Emperor, “little dreamed that this
would so soon be the case. He was short-sighted, and could not see
very far before him. I thought, as he did, that all could not end with
the Republic; but I foresaw the establishment of the Empire.
Accordingly, two or three years afterwards, the circumstance I have
just related being still fresh in my recollection, I said to Sieyes,
at one of my grand audiences: Well, you are now pell-mell with all the
old Dukes and Marquises; do you think all is settled now?”—“Oh, yes,”
replied Sieyes, bowing profoundly; “you have wrought miracles, which
were never before equalled, and which I never could have foreseen.”

During the Consulate, Napoleon was once standing in front of the Hotel
de la Marine, viewing a public illumination. Beside him was a lady, who
to all appearance had formerly moved in a distinguished sphere,
accompanied by her daughter, a very pretty girl, to whom she was
pointing out all the persons of note, as they passed to and fro in the
apartments. Calling her daughter’s attention to a certain individual,
she said: “Remind me to go and pay my respects to him some day. We ought
to do so, for he has rendered us great service.” “But, mother,” replied
the young lady, “I did not know that we were expected to shew gratitude
to such people. I thought they were too happy in being able to oblige
persons of our quality.” “Certainly,” said the Emperor, “La Bruyere
would have turned this incident to good account.”

Napoleon sometimes went out in disguise early in the morning, traversing
the streets of the capital alone, and mingling with the labouring
classes of the people, with whose condition and sentiments he wished to
make himself acquainted. In the Council of State I have often heard him
advise the Prefect of Police to adopt this plan. He called it the
_Caliph system of police_, and said he esteemed it to be the best.

On his return from the disastrous campaigns of Moscow and Leipsic,
Napoleon, in order to maintain the appearance of confidence, frequently
appeared amidst the multitude with scarcely any attendants. He visited
the market-places, the faubourgs, and all the populous districts of the
capital, conversing familiarly with the people; and he was every where
received and treated with respect.

One day, at La Halle, a woman with whom he had been holding a little
dialogue, bluntly told him he ought to make peace. “Good woman,” replied
the Emperor, “sell your greens, and leave me to settle my affairs. Let
every one attend to his own calling.” The bystanders laughed, and
applauded him.

On another occasion, at the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, when surrounded by
an immense concourse of people, whom he was treating very
condescendingly, some one asked whether affairs were really as bad as
they were represented to be? “Why, certainly,” replied the Emperor, “I
cannot say that things are going on very well.” “But what will be the
end of this?” “Heaven knows!” “Will the enemy enter France?” “Very
possibly; and he may even march to Paris if you do not assist me. I have
not a million of arms. I cannot do all by my own individual efforts.”
“We will support you,” exclaimed a number of voices. “Then I shall beat
the enemy, and preserve the glory of France.” “But what must we do?”
“You must enlist and fight.” “We will,’ said one of the crowd; “but we
must make a few conditions!” “What are they?” “We will not pass the
frontier.” “You shall not be required to do so.” “We wish to serve in
the guards,” said another. “You shall do so.” The air instantly
resounded with acclamations. Registers were immediately opened, and two
thousand men enlisted in the course of the day. Napoleon returned to the
Tuileries; and, as he entered the Place Carousel on horseback,
surrounded by the multitude, whose acclamations rent the air, it was
supposed that an insurrection had broken out, and the gates were about
to be closed.

On his return from the Island of Elba, the Emperor made another visit to
the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, where he was received with equal enthusiasm,
and conducted back to the palace in a similar manner. As he passed
through the Faubourg Saint-Germain, the multitude who escorted him
halted before the principal hotels, and manifested their disapprobation
by angry words and gestures. The Emperor observed that he had scarcely
ever been placed in so delicate a situation. “How many evils might have
ensued,” said he, “had a single stone been thrown by the mob. Had a
single imprudent word, or even an equivocal look, escaped me, the whole
Faubourg might have been destroyed; and I am convinced that its
preservation was to be attributed wholly to my presence of mind, and the
respect which the multitude entertained for me.”

To-day I attended the Emperor at his toilet. Santini was cutting his
hair, and a large tuft fell at my feet. I stooped to pick it up, and the
Emperor, observing me, asked what I was doing. I replied that I had
dropped something, upon which he smiled and pinched my ear: he guessed
what I had picked up.

Speaking of the depravity and corruption of manners which prevailed at
the time when he commanded the army of the interior in Paris, Napoleon
mentioned that a contractor came to solicit some signatures from him,
and to beg that he would give his support to certain appointments and
supplies: this he promised to do without hesitation, conceiving that
there was nothing unfair in the proposal. Before he withdrew, the
contractor dextrously took an opportunity of leaving on the
chimney-piece two rouleaux containing a hundred Louis. This was an
enormous sum in specie, for at that time paper money was chiefly in use.
Fortunately, the General was the first to discover the circumstance, and
the visitor was called back before he had gone far. He at first
attempted to deny having left the money; but he afterwards acknowledged
it, observing that every one must live, and that the method he had
adopted was, he believed, the general one. He, however, hoped that he
might be forgiven if he had unintentionally done wrong, adding that it
was very seldom necessary to ask pardon for such offences.

At the hour at which the Emperor generally takes his walk, he found
himself very drowsy; but he was determined to rouse himself, and he went
out though the wind was blowing violently. After walking a short
distance, he returned to the house, and we entered Madame de Montholon’s
apartment. The Emperor had no sooner seated himself on the sofa, than he
felt inclined to fall asleep. He rose and proceeded to the drawing-room.
He complained of great internal heat, and asked for a glass of toast and
water. His drowsiness still continued, and he retired to his chamber to
lie down.

About seven o’clock he sent for me, and gave me the following note,
which he desired me to keep along with the rest of the official papers.
It was the copy of a note which he had sent that morning to the
Governor....

_Note._—“I recollect that in a conversation which took place between
General Lowe and some of the gentlemen of my suite, (alluding to the
conversation of the 15th,) some observations were made respecting my
situation, which were not conformable with my ideas. I abdicated to the
Representatives of the people and in favour of my son. I proceeded with
confidence to England, with the intention of living either there or in
America, in profound retirement, and under the name of a Colonel who was
killed in battle by my side. _I had resolved to have nothing to do with
political affairs of any kind whatever._

“When I went on board the Northumberland, I was informed that I was a
prisoner of war, that I was to be transported beyond the Line, and that
I was to be called _General Bonaparte_. This obliged me to retain
ostensibly the title of the Emperor Napoleon, in opposition to the name
of General Bonaparte, which was thus to be forced upon me.

“About seven or eight months ago, Count Montholon proposed to obviate
the little difficulties that are continually arising, by my adopting an
ordinary name. The Admiral thought it necessary to write to London on
this subject, and there the matter rested.

“The name which is now applied to me has the advantage of not prejudging
the past; but it is not in unison with the forms of society. _I am still
disposed to assume a name that may be conformable with custom_; I once
more repeat that whenever I may be released from my cruel captivity, _I
am still willing to continue a stranger to all political affairs,
whatever may take place in the world_. Such is my determination; and no
other declaration, on this subject, has my sanction.”

The Emperor ate but little dinner; there was something very
extraordinary in the lethargy that had come over him. He had been
overpowered by drowsiness during the whole of the day; and yet when he
withdrew he said he was afraid he should not sleep, his sensations were
so extraordinary. He generally rests soundly when he is inclined to
sleep, but he had been dozing all day long without being able to get any
rest.

To-day a frigate sailed for Europe.

        LOUIS XVI.—MARIE ANTOINETTE.—MADAME CAMPAN.—LEONARD.—THE
                         PRINCESS DE LAMBALLE.

17th. About noon the Emperor sent for me; he had just finished his
breakfast. He was no better than he had been yesterday. He endeavoured
to converse a little, and then read in English a few pages of the Vicar
of Wakefield. He still complained of drowsiness, and, after several vain
efforts to rouse himself, he retired to his chamber to try to get a nap.
He was the more astonished that this heaviness should continue, as he
said he had slept well during the night.

He did not leave his chamber until dinner was ready, and after dinner he
tried to read a little of Don Quixote; but he almost immediately laid
down the book, and retired. As it was very early, he sent for me after
he had gone to bed, and I remained with him nearly an hour conversing on
different subjects.

We spoke of Louis XVI., the Queen, Madame Elizabeth, their martyrdom,
&c. He asked me to tell him what I knew of the King and Queen, and what
they had said to me on my presentation. The forms and ceremonies of the
Court were, I informed him, the same as those which were adopted during
the Empire. As to character, I observed, it was generally admitted that
the Queen had disappointed public expectation. During the first moments
of the revolutionary storm, there was every reason to suppose her to be
a woman of great talent and energy; but subsequently these qualities
seemed entirely to forsake her. With regard to the King, I mentioned the
opinion formed of him by M. Bertrand de Molleville, with whom I had been
well acquainted, and who was Minister of Marine to Louis XVI. at the
height of the crisis. He pronounced the King to have possessed
considerable information, sound judgment, and excellent intentions; but
there it all ended. He lost himself by the multiplicity of advice which
he solicited, and by his irresolute and wavering mode of following that
advice.

The Emperor, in his turn, retraced the portrait of the Queen, by Madame
Campan, who, he observed, having been her confidante, and having served
her with zeal, affection and fidelity, might be expected to have known a
great deal about her, and deserved to be considered as good authority.
Madame Campan, he said, had communicated to him many details of the
private life of the Queen; and he related some particulars which he had
derived from that source.

The Queen, according to Madame Campan, was a fascinating woman, but
destitute of talent: she was better calculated to be a votary of
pleasure than a participator in affairs of State. She possessed an
excellent heart, was parsimonious, rather than extravagant, and by no
means possessed strength of character equal to the trying circumstances
in which she was placed. She obtained regular information of the schemes
that were carrying on abroad; and she never entertained a doubt of her
deliverance, even up to the fatal 10th of August, the catastrophe of
which was brought about solely by the intrigues and hopes of the Court,
which were developed to the world through the imprudence of the King and
those who surrounded him.

“On the terrible night of the 5th of October,” said the Emperor, “a
person for whom the Queen entertained a high regard, and whom I
afterwards treated very ill at Rastadt, hastened to join the Princess at
Versailles: whether he had been sent for, or whether he went of his own
accord to share her dangers, I know not. It is in these trying moments,”
continued the Emperor, “that we feel most in need of the advice and
consolation of those who are devoted to us. At the moment of the
catastrophe, when the palace was stormed, the Queen fled for refuge to
the King’s apartments; but her confident was exposed to the greatest
dangers, and only escaped by leaping out of a window.”

I informed the Emperor that the Queen had greatly fallen in the
estimation of the emigrants, by her conduct during the events of
Varennes; she was reproached for not having allowed the King to set out
alone, and for having betrayed a want of skill and energy during the
flight of the Royal family. Nothing indeed, could be more ill managed
and confused than the journey to Varennes. A curious circumstance
connected with that event was, that Leonard, the Queen’s famous
_coiffeur_, found means to pass, in his cabriolet, through the midst of
the tumult; and he arrived at Coblentz, bringing with him the Marshal’s
baton, which, it was said, the King had carried away from the Tuileries,
in order to deliver it to M. de Bouillé, when he should join him.

“It was,” said the Emperor, “an established rule with the members of the
House of Austria to observe profound silence respecting the Queen of
France. Whenever Marie Antoinette was mentioned, they cast down their
eyes, and dexterously changed the conversation, as if to avoid a
disagreeable and embarrassing subject. This rule,” continued the
Emperor, “was adopted by all the members of the family, and recommended
to their agents abroad. The efforts lately made by the French Princes in
Paris to revive the interest attached to the memory of the unfortunate
Queen must certainly have been displeasing to the Court of Vienna.”

The Emperor next asked me some questions concerning the Princess de
Lamballe, of whom he said he knew nothing. I was enabled to answer his
questions, as I had known the Princess well. One of my cousins had been
her lady of honour; and, on my arrival at Aix-la-Chapelle, at the
commencement of my emigration, I was received as one of her household,
and treated with the utmost kindness.

At Aix-la-Chapelle the Princess de Lamballe had assembled round her many
of the wrecks of Versailles: she was surrounded by nobles and persons of
fashion, who had been connected with the old Court. She was also visited
by many illustrious foreigners; and while I remained with her, I
frequently saw Gustavus III., King of Sweden, who went by the name of
the Count de Haga; Prince Ferdinand of Prussia, and his children, the
eldest of whom (Prince Louis) was killed just before the battle Jena;
the duchess of Cumberland, widow of a brother of the King of England,
&c.

When Louis XVI. solemnly accepted the Constitution, and thus recomposed
the nation, the Princess received an official letter from the Queen,
inviting her to return to her situation. She consulted her old friends,
who declared themselves of opinion that the Queen was not free, and,
conceiving that there would be no safety in Paris, they advised her to
take no notice of the Queen’s letter, and to let it be supposed that it
had never come to hand. The Princess, however, having asked some other
individuals, how they would advise her to act, they unfortunately
replied: “Madam, you shared the prosperity of the Queen, and you have
now a noble opportunity of proving your fidelity, particularly since you
are no longer her favourite.” The Princess possessed lofty sentiments,
warm affections, and was of a rather romantic turn of mind. She declared
her intention of setting out next day for Paris. The unfortunate lady,
therefore, returned to the capital, with a full knowledge of the danger
to which she was exposed; and she fell the victim of generosity and
noble sentiment. When the Princess determined on proceeding to Paris, my
friends proposed that I should accompany her as one of her suite. My
youth, together with the circumstance of my being almost a stranger in
Paris, would have enabled me to pass unnoticed, and I might perhaps have
been serviceable to her; but at the moment of her departure, some
difficulties arose which prevented me from accompanying her. However, I
became her correspondent; and every other day I transmitted to her the
absurd stories of every kind, which served to feed our hopes, and to
which we failed not to give implicit credit. I continued my
correspondence while we remained in the country; I even continued it
after she had ceased to exist!

The extreme affliction in which I was plunged, on hearing of her
dreadful fate, was occasionally augmented by the fear that my letters
might perhaps have had some share in producing it. I happen to have now
in my possession some lines which she wrote a few days before the
horrible catastrophe that closed her existence. They are dated _from my
dungeon_; for so she called the Pavilion of Flora, which she at that
time occupied in the Tuileries.

                            END OF VOL. III.

             ANDOVER: STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY B. BENSLEY

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               Footnotes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Transcriber’s Note

Certain conventions of the text have been modified. For instance, a
series of dots (....) were employed where a name was elided. These have
been replaced with long dashes (———) in order to avoid awkward line
breaks.

Given the publication date, spelling has been generally allowed to stand
as printed. For instance, the words ‘somnabule’ and ‘somnabulism’, on p.
43, are apparently in error, but are consistent with one another.
However, errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been
corrected, and are noted below.

There were a number of instances in the text where quoted words were
missing either an opening or closing quotation mark. The proper
placement is not always obvious, but the most plausible choice has been
made, based on the context and voice. Among the most challenging is the
author’s recounting of Napolean’s recollection of an interchange with
the Pope on p. 130.

The issues tabulated below should be noted, along with the resolutions.
The references below are to the page and line in the original.

  25.25    “In obta[in]ing possession of Illyria          Added.
  43.25    [somnabule], who, at night runs along the roof _sic_
  43.29    on his [somnabulism],                          _sic_
  52.32    The Emperor rema[r]ked                         Added.
  63.15    that adulation w[sa/as] not pushed so far      Transposed.
  66.35    a suitable match for your Princess.[’]         Added.
  72.20    [“/‘]You will see me again shortly             Replaced.
  77.33    while we[re / re]tained possession of it.      Moved space.
  81.19    [‘]How’, exclaimed he,                         Added.
  90.33    the 13th Vend[e/é]miaire                       Replaced.
  95.38    under which [b/h]e suffers                     Replaced.
  102.5    and altogether useless.[”]                     Added.
  105.18   even when that great E[x/m]press seated on her Replaced.
           throne
  107.41   unless it was agreeable to me[,/.]             Replaced.
  108.30   might have incited him in his blindness.[”]    Added.
  108.31   [“]At the end of this                          Removed.
  116.40   or a pain in my stomach.[’/”]                  Replaced.
  120.7    will be guilty of my destruction[’]”           Added.
  121.15   she exclaimed, [‘]but a single moment left;    Added.
  121.24   he published a pamph[l]et                      Added.
  130.16   if it be feasible.’[”] It was, however,        Added.
  130.26   [“]‘I shall never,’ he remarked,               Added.
  131.2    whatever I wished.[”]                          Added.
  140.28   [“]Sire,” I answered,                          Added.
  147.17   [‘]Thousand and One Nights’                    Added.
  151.30   as do all the principles of sound[,] morality. Removed.
  154.38   at Lodi, at Castiglione, a[t] Rivoli, at       Added.
           Arcole
  155.32   the[ir/re] existed on this rock                Replaced.
  155.37   [“]Permission could not be obtained to         Added.
           subscribe
  155.40   In conse[se]quence of the demand               Removed
  159.6    Those, who, who> fail in respect to Napoleon,  Removed.
  159.38   said he, [“]is a very happy connexion.         Added.
  163.11   with the nations situated in their rear.[”]    Added.
  166.32   [“]My leisure and my old age would have been   Removed.
           devoted,
  168.1    The army marched, with difficulty, over that   Added.
           tract tract[.]
  171.22   supplies the whole of the establis[h]ment with Added.
           water
  174.17   to some houses of the Franks[,/’] quarter      Replaced.
  189.36   four[-]and-twenty hours                        Added.
  199.15   only not all at the same[,] time               Removed.
  230.34   ar[r]angements for the battles of Leipsic      Added.
  232.31   co[ /a]lesced Powers                           Restored.
  239.28   ra[t]her congratulate yourselves               Added.
  259.39   when I happene[n]d to be alone with him        Removed.
  260.35   The Holy League which[ which] had been formed  Removed/
           against Henry III.
  261.15   But these parli[a]ments drew up                Added.
  214.1    beat 107,000 Russians or Prussians[’]          Removed.
  219.25   insuring the independ[a/e]nce of France        Replaced.
  265.30   by the treaty of Camp[i]o-Formio               Removed.
  267.38   a Burgundy, a Champa[n]gne                     Removed.
  279.26   from the States of the House of Austria[.]     Restored.
  284.15   in one of the small Versailles[,] diligences   Removed.
  292.29   as far as Avi[n]gnon, he had heard nothing but Removed.
           regret
  292.39   he several times called after him.[”/:]        Replaced.
  294.12   [“]depended on my speed.                       Added.
  294.17   was quitting the Tuileries.[”]                 Added.
  298.19   all public bodies, all classes[,] of the       Removed.
           citizens
  300.36   the safest, and the best[.]                    Added.
  301.41   with expressions of the [f]eelings             Added.
  302.39   the Bourbons ab[o/a]ndoning a monarchy         Replaced.
  304.9    ON IMPOS[S]IBILITIES.                          Added.
  305.22   [“]Accordingly,” continued Bertrand,           Removed.
  312.15   the Mississippi Company[,]                     Added.
  315.13   in a very short time a Mayor of the Palace.[”] Added.
  319.13   [“]The Orientals, on the other hand, differ    Added.
  321.37   [“]On my return from Elba                      Added.
  332.30   _M[âi/aî]tre des Requêtes_                     Replaced.
  337.1    the[ the] Council of State                     Removed.
  346.22   and I am soon asleep.[”]                       Removed.
  357.26   observed he, [“]of amalgamating all kinds of   Added.
           merit
  371.36   in less than three months[: “]/:”] and so      Replaced.
           saying,
  375.19   th[e/a]n he had when he was merely the         Replaced.
           Minister
  376.34   who had sacrificed his troops to facili[t]ate  Added.
           the operations
  376.39   [D/d]’Antraigues>, finding that all his        Replaced.
           secrets
  383.9    I will remain her[e] alone.                    Added.
  386.1    “I was not aware of that[,]” replied I;        Added.
  386.27   yet I d[l/i]d not mean to question his right   Replaced.
  388.21   “Tell him,” said [“]Napoleon, [“]that his      Moved.
           instructions
  390.8    He had bee[d/n] reading                        Replaced.
  399.10   on my arrival at Aix-la[-]Chappelle            Restored.
  400.5    my friends proposed that I should[a’/          Replaced.
           a]ccompany her
  400.9    but at [i]the moment of her departure,         Removed.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE, EXILE, AND CONVERSATIONS OF THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON. (VOL. III) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

------
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Memoirs of the life, exile, and conversations of the Emperor Napoleon. (Vol. IV)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Memoirs of the life, exile, and conversations of the Emperor Napoleon. (Vol. IV)

Author: comte de Emmanuel-Auguste-Dieudonné Las Cases


        
Release date: January 16, 2017 [eBook #53970]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53970

Credits: Produced by KD Weeks, Josep Cols Canals and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE, EXILE, AND CONVERSATIONS OF THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON. (VOL. IV) ***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_.

Footnotes have been moved to follow the paragraphs in which they are
referenced.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

This is the fourth of four volumes, which can be found at Project
Gutenberg here:

   Volume I        https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53967
   Volume II       https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53968
   Volume III      https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53969
   Volume IV       https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53970

[Illustration:

  _Rob^t. Cooper Scul^t._

  COUNT DE LAS CASES.
]




                                MEMOIRS
                                   OF
                            THE LIFE, EXILE,
                                  AND
                             CONVERSATIONS,
                                 OF THE
                           EMPEROR NAPOLEON.

                                   BY

                        THE COUNT DE LAS CASES.


                             A NEW EDITION.


                             WITH PORTRAITS

                   AND NUMEROUS OTHER EMBELLISHMENTS.


                                VOL. IV.


                                LONDON:
                      PUBLISHED FOR HENRY COLBURN,
 BY RICHARD BENTLEY; BELL AND BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH; J. CUMMING, DUBLIN:
                          AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.

                                -------

                              MDCCCXXXVI.

            ANDOVER: STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY B. BENSLEY.

[Illustration:

  NAPOLEON’S HUMANITY.

  London: Published for HENRY COLBURN, December, 1835.
]




                                MEMOIRS

                                   OF

                         THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON.


      REMOVAL OF FOUR PERSONS OF OUR ESTABLISHMENT.--RECOLLECTIONS
                      OF THE EMPEROR’S EARLY LIFE.

Oct. 18, 1816.—I did not see the Emperor until five o’clock, when he
sent for me to attend him in the drawing-room. He continued indisposed;
but he had been engaged all the morning in dictating to the Grand
Marshal. He summoned all the persons of his suite in succession. He was
low-spirited and heavy; but at the same time there was a certain
restlessness about him. He sought to amuse himself in various ways. He
first tried chess, then dominos, and then chess again; but he was at
length compelled to return to his chamber, finding it impossible to sit
up. The state of the weather, joined to the vexations to which we are
exposed, concur in producing torments almost beyond endurance. The
weather has an effect on the nerves, and the persecutions that are
heaped upon us are still worse to bear. Every word uttered by the
Governor increases our misery. To-day he had signified his intention of
removing four of our establishment, which has been the cause of general
lamentation among the household: the individuals singled out for removal
regret their separation from their companions; while those who are to
remain are tormented by the fear of speedily sharing the same fate. We
compared Sir Hudson Lowe to Scylla, devouring the four companions of
Ulysses.

The Governor has informed me that he also intends removing my servant,
who is an inhabitant of the island, and with whom I am very well
satisfied. He is doubtless afraid that the man will become too much
attached to me. He proposes to send me a servant of his own choosing, a
favour for which I feel very grateful, though I have no intention of
availing myself of the kind offer.

At dinner the Emperor ate but little. During the dessert, however, his
spirits revived a little, and we began to converse on the events of his
early life. This is a subject on which he delights to dwell, and which
always affords him a source of new and lively interest. He repeated many
of the particulars which I have already related at different times. He
said that he loved to go back to that happy age when all is gaiety and
enjoyment;—that happy period of hope and rising ambition, when the world
first opens before us, and the mind fondly cherishes every romantic
dream. He spoke of his regiment, and the pleasures he had enjoyed when
he first mingled in society. On mentioning the different balls and fêtes
which he had attended in his youthful days, he described one as having
been particularly splendid. “But,” said he, “at that time my notions of
splendour were very different from what they now are.”

Alluding to the date of certain circumstances, he observed that it would
be difficult for him to divide his life year by year. We observed that
if he would only date the events of four or five years, we could easily
take all the rest upon ourselves. He reverted to his military _début_ at
Toulon, the circumstances that first called him into notice, the sudden
ascendency which he acquired by his first successes, and the ambition
with which they inspired him: “And yet,” said he, “I was far from
entertaining a high opinion of myself. It was not till after the battle
of Lodi that I conceived those lofty notions of ambition which were
confirmed in Egypt, after the victory of the Pyramids and the possession
of Cairo. Then,” said he, “I willingly resigned myself to every
brilliant dream.”

The Emperor had become very cheerful and talkative, and he did not
retire until midnight. We looked upon this as a sort of resuscitation.

                       MADAME DE GENLIS’ NOVELS.

19th.—Our four proscripts, namely, the Pole, Santini, Archambault, and
Rousseau, left us about the middle of the day. In an hour they sailed
for the Cape with a brisk wind.

About three o’clock the Emperor sent for me. He was in the drawing-room,
and he desired to have Madame de Genlis’ novels brought to him. He read
a few pages aloud; but he soon laid down the books, observing that they
told him nothing. It was not so with me: the few pages that I had just
heard touched many tender strings. They presented a picture of the
elegant society of Paris, detailed the names of streets and monuments,
described familiar conversations, and retraced well-known portraits: all
this produced a forcible impression on me. The realities exist, I myself
exist, and yet we are separated, by distance, time, and, doubtless, by
eternity! I could at this moment look with indifference on pleasure and
gaiety; but the recollection of persons and places, which had thus been
revived, filled me with feelings of deep melancholy and regret.

The Grand Marshal now arrived, and the Emperor dictated to him till
dinner-time.

In the evening the Emperor asked for the Arabian Nights; but he was
unable to read, and soon laid aside the book.

               VALUATION OF THE BOOKS SENT OUT TO US.—THE
               GRAND MARSHAL COMES TO LIVE NEARER TO US.

20th.—I spent the day in estimating the value of the books sent to us
from London, and for which an enormous sum is claimed from the Emperor.
Our valuation did not amount to even half that sum.

The Emperor did not appear in the drawing-room until a moment before
dinner; he had not, he said, seen any body the whole day; he had sought
for diversion, and found it in continued application. After dinner he
again took up the Arabian Nights.

The Grand Marshal and his family have this day left Hut’s Gate, their
first residence, which was situated about one league from Longwood. They
have at last taken possession of their new house, by which means we are
now nearly under the same roof. This was quite an event for them and for
us.

EXPEDITION OF ST. LOUIS IN EGYPT.—OUR FEMALE AUTHORS.—MADAME DE
  STAEL.—THE WRITERS INIMICAL TO NAPOLEON WILL BITE AGAINST GRANITE.

21st.—I went after breakfast to see Madame Bertrand. She was so confined
at Hut’s Gate that she will have no cause to regret being shut up within
our enclosure, and we shall be very great gainers by it. For my part it
seemed to me as if I had found part of my family.

Our limits become every day more circumscribed. The number of sentries
is augmented, every thing reminds us incessantly of our horrible prison.

The Emperor said to me, whilst he was dressing, “that he was determined
to apply, once more, regularly to his occupations, which had been
interrupted by the late ill-treatment from our horrible Governor.” I
urged him to do so with all my might, as well for his own sake as for
ours, and for France and History.

The weather was too bad to allow the Emperor to take the air. He went
into his library, and looked over the History of the Crusades by
Michaud, and the Memoirs of Joinville. He then went to the drawing-room,
and conversed for some time longer; particularly respecting the servant
whom they wish to take from me, the one they intend to give me, &c.

The Governor will only give for the Emperor’s plate a sum more than one
fifth less than the plate is valued at in Paris, and yet he will neither
allow any competition for the sale of it in the Island, nor of its being
taken to London!...

The unfortunate people that have been shipped for the Cape will be fed
like common sailors. I have heard, on this occasion, that the same thing
took place on board the Northumberland, and that the Emperor’s servants
had not had any indulgence more than the common sailors, except by
paying for it.

After dinner the Emperor read, in Joinville, an account of the
expedition of St. Louis in Egypt. He analysed it, pointing out its
defects, and comparing the movements and the plan of that Expedition
with the plan adopted by himself; concluding that “if he had acted in
the same manner as St. Louis had done, he should undoubtedly have shared
the same fate.”

The Emperor retired early and sent for me. The conversation again fell
upon his excursions in Egypt, and in Syria. Matilda, a novel, by Madam
Cottin, the scene of which is laid in those countries, being
incidentally mentioned, led the Emperor to take a review of our female
authors. He spoke of Madame Roland and her Memoirs, of Madame de Genlis,
of Madame Cottin, whose Claire d’Albe he had just been reading, and of
Madame de Staël. He spoke at length about the latter, and repeated in
part what has already been said. Speaking of her exile, he said: “Her
house had become quite an arsenal against me; people went there to be
dubbed knights. She endeavoured to raise enemies against me and fought
against me herself. She was at once Armida and Clorinda.” Then, summing
up his arguments as he was wont to do, he said: “After all, it cannot be
denied that Madame de Staël is a very distinguished woman, endowed with
great talents and possessing a considerable share of wit. She will go
down to posterity. It was more than once hinted to me, in order to
soften me in her favour, that she was an adversary to be feared, and
might become a useful ally; and certainly if, instead of reviling me as
she did, she had spoken in my praise, it might no doubt have proved
advantageous to me; for her position and her abilities gave her an
absolute sway over the saloons, and their influence in Paris is well
known.” He then added, “Notwithstanding all that she has said against
me, and all that she will yet say, I am certainly far from thinking or
saying that she has a bad heart: the fact is, that she and I have waged
a little war against each other, and that is all.” Then taking a review
of the numerous writers who have declaimed against him, he said: “I am
destined to be their food, but I have little fear of becoming their
victim; they will bite against granite; my history is made up of facts,
and words alone cannot destroy them. In order to fight against me
successfully, somebody should appear in the lists armed with the weight
and authority of facts on his side. If such a man as the great
Frederick, or any other man of his cast, were to take to writing against
me, it would be a different thing; it would then, perhaps, be time for
me to begin to be moved; but as for all other writers, whatever be their
talent, their efforts will be vain. My fame will survive: and when they
wish to be admired, they will sound my praise.”

             CARE TAKEN OF THE WOUNDED IN THE ARMIES.—BARON
                  LARREY.—CHARACTERISTIC CIRCUMSTANCE.

22nd—23d. The weather has been very bad. The Emperor, suffering greatly
from the tooth-ache, and having a swelled cheek, has not been able to go
out for the last two days. I have spent the greatest part of them with
him, in his apartment, or in the drawing-room, which he has converted
into a promenade, by opening the doors of communication from one to the
other.

Amongst the various subjects of our conversation, he once told me
certain things which he had heard, and at which I much rejoiced. Nothing
can give a more striking proof of the horrors of our situation than the
importance which I attached to them. But every thing is in proportion to
the situation in which we are placed.

At another time, the Emperor expressed his regret at being so lazy with
respect to the English language. I told him that he now knew as much of
it as he wanted. He could read all books; it was now only necessary to
reduce the whole to a regular system—but, were the rule and compass fit
things for him?

After going through several subjects of conversation, the Emperor spoke
of Baron Larrey, on whom he passed the highest encomium, saying that
Larrey had left the impression on his mind of a truly honest man; that
to science he united, in the highest degree, the virtue of active
philanthropy: he looked upon all the wounded as belonging to his family;
every consideration gave way before the care which he bestowed upon the
hospitals. “In our first campaigns under the Republic, which have been
so much calumniated,” said the Emperor, “a most fortunate revolution
took place in the surgical department, which has since spread to all the
armies of Europe; and to Larrey it is, in great measure, that mankind is
indebted for it. The surgeon now shares the dangers of the soldier: it
is in the midst of the fire that he devotes his attentions to him.
Larrey possesses all my esteem and my gratitude,” &c.

This favourable impression seems clearly to have occupied Napoleon’s
mind in his last moments; for he has left Larrey a mark of his
remembrance, with this honourable testimony “_The most virtuous man that
I have known_.” On reading these words, I concluded that some peculiar
circumstance must have produced this most magnificent expression of
esteem, and the following is the result of my inquiries.

After the battles of Lützen, Wurtzen, and Bautzen, the victorious
Napoleon sent for the surgeon (Larrey), to ascertain, as usual, the
number of the wounded, and the state in which they were. They happened
to be, on this occasion, considerably more numerous than at other times
and in other engagements. The Emperor was surprised at this
circumstance, and endeavoured to explain the cause of it. M. Larrey
thought that, independently of local causes, it might be found in the
great number of soldiers who had fought on that day for the first time,
and who were, on that account, more awkward in their movements, and less
expert in avoiding danger. The Emperor, whose mind was extremely
pre-occupied by this affair, was not satisfied with this explanation,
and made inquiries elsewhere. As there were, at that moment, several
persons who were heartily tired of war; who would have wished for peace
on any conditions; and who would not have been sorry to see the Emperor
compelled to make it, whether from the effect of calculation or
conviction; the Emperor was told, in answer to his inquiries, that the
immense number of wounded ought not to be a matter of surprise; that the
greatest proportion of them were wounded in the hand, and they had
inflicted the wound on themselves, in order to be disabled from
fighting. The Emperor was thunderstruck at this information; he repeated
his inquiries, and found them attended with the same result; he was in a
state of despair. “If it be thus,” he exclaimed, “notwithstanding our
success, our situation is hopeless: France will be delivered up
defenceless to the barbarians.” And turning over in his mind by what
means he should put a stop to this contagion, he ordered all the wounded
of a certain description to be put on one side; and named a commission,
composed of surgeons, with Larrey at their head, to examine their
wounds, resolved to punish most severely those who should be found to
have been so cowardly as to mutilate themselves. M. Larrey, still
unwilling to believe in this voluntary self-mutilation, which, in his
opinion, was a stain on the honour of the army and of the nation,
appeared before the Emperor to state his opinion once more to him. But
Napoleon, incensed at his obstinacy, which some persons had taken care
to magnify in his eyes, said to him, with severity, “Sir, you will make
your observations to me officially;—go and fulfil your duty.”

Baron Larrey immediately applied to the business, but in a solemn
manner; he followed up the most trifling details, and therefore
proceeded slowly, whilst various motives rendered many persons impatient
to see the issue; and it was known that the Emperor himself was not less
impatient. Some persons did not fail to point out to M. Larrey the
delicate situation in which he was placed; but he turned a deaf ear to
all observations, and remained unmoved. At last, after some days, he
went to the Emperor, insisting upon being allowed to deliver his report
himself. “Well Sir,” said the Emperor, “Do you still persist in your
opinion?”—“More than that, Sire, I am come to prove to your Majesty that
I was right; these brave young men were basely calumniated: I have spent
a considerable time in the strictest investigation, and I have not found
one single man guilty; there is a deposition in writing on the
individual case of every one of those wounded men: bales of them follow
me; your Majesty may order them to be examined.” The Emperor looked at
him with a gloomy expression, and, taking his report with a kind of
emotion, he said, “Very well, Sir, I will look into it;” and he paced
the room with rapid strides, with an air of agitation and indecision; at
last, coming up to Larrey with an open countenance, he shook him
cordially by the hand, and said, with emotion: “Farewell, M. Larrey, a
sovereign is truly fortunate to have to do with such men as you are; you
will receive my orders.” M. Larrey received the same evening from
Napoleon his picture set in diamonds, 6000 francs in gold, and a pension
on the State of 3000 francs, independent, it was said, of every other
reward to which he might be entitled by his rank, his seniority, and his
future services. Such traits are invaluable for history; as they
exhibit, on the one hand, an honest man who does not hesitate to defend
truth against a sovereign prepossessed and incensed; and because they
display, on the other, the noble mind of the sovereign in the happiness
and the gratitude which he expressed on being undeceived.

THE EMPEROR ACCEPTS MY FOUR THOUSAND LOUIS.—TRAGEDY OF EURIPIDES IN ITS
  ORIGINAL PURITY ORDERED FOR THE THEATRE AT SAINT-CLOUD.—MARSHAL
  JOURDAN.

24th.—The Emperor has not been out, he has not sent for any of us, and
he has not appeared at dinner. This made us fear that he was ill. After
ten o’clock he sent for me, as I was not yet in bed. He told me he had
not left his sofa the whole day; he had been reading for nearly eighteen
hours. He had only taken a little soup. He had had the tooth-ache. I
told him we had feared that it was something more serious, for our grief
at not seeing him was always increased by apprehension.

In a short time, he began to touch upon our pecuniary resources. He had,
as he humorously expressed it, held his Council in the morning; the
plate had been weighed, and the quantity that was to be sold had been
computed; the produce of it, he added, would enable us to go on for some
time longer. I again renewed the offer of the four thousand Louis which
I had in the English funds, and he deigned to accept them. “Mine is a
singular situation,” said he; “I have no doubt that if a communication
were allowed with me, and my relatives, or even many strangers, could
suspect that I am in want, I should soon be amply provided with every
thing that I require; but ought I to be a burthen to my friends, and
expose them to the undue advantage which the English ministers might
take of their good-will? I have applied to those ministers for a few
books, and they have sent them to me with all the inattention and
neglect of a careless agent. They claim from me fifteen hundred or two
thousand pounds sterling, that is, about 50,000 francs, for what I might
certainly have procured for less than 12,000. Would it not be the same
with every thing else? If I accept what you offer, it must be strictly
applied to our immediate wants; for, after all, we must live, and we
really cannot live upon what they give us. The small addition of one
hundred Louis per month would just be sufficient, and that is the sum
which you must ask for, and appropriate as carefully as possible.”

The calash then came up to us; it was driven four-in-hand by Archambaud.
This could not be otherwise, since the departure of Archambaud’s
brother. The Emperor refused at first to get into the carriage; he did
not think it prudent, in the midst of the stumps of trees with which we
were surrounded; he remembered his famous fall at Saint-Cloud, and
wished one of the English servants to ride as postilion, but Archambaud
protested that he should feel less secure in that manner than in driving
alone. Since the departure of his brother, he said, he had been
constantly practising amongst the trees, in order to be sure that he
could answer for himself. The Emperor then got in the calash, and we
took two turns. On our return he went to see the residence of the Grand
Marshal, with which he was not yet acquainted.

The evening was terminated by reading some passages of Longepierre’s
tragedy of Medea, which the Emperor interrupted, to compare it with that
of Euripides on the same subject, which he ordered to be brought to him.
He mentioned, on the subject, that he had formerly ordered one of the
Greek tragedies to be represented at his theatre in the palace, in all
its integrity, choosing the best possible translation, and imitating as
closely as possible the manners, dresses, forms, and scenery of the
original. He could not recollect what circumstance or what obstacle had
prevented the execution of the plan.

Having retired to his apartment, and not finding himself disposed to
sleep, he took some turns in his room, and threw himself on his sofa. He
opened a kind of political almanack which happened to be at hand; and
fell upon a list of our Marshals, which he passed in review, adding, at
the same time, quotations and anecdotes already known or related. When
he came to Marshal Jourdan, he dwelt for some time on the subject, and
concluded by saying: “This is one who has been assuredly very ill
treated by me; it was, therefore, natural to conclude that he would be
highly incensed against me; but I have heard with pleasure that he has
behaved with great moderation since my fall. He has set an example of
that elevation of mind which serves to distinguish men, and does honour
to their character. However, he was a true patriot, and that explains
many things.”

SUMMARY OF JULY, AUGUST, SEPTEMBER, AND OCTOBER.—OF MR. O’MEARA’S
  WORK.—ACTION NOW BROUGHT AGAINST HIM BY SIR HUDSON LOWE.—A FEW WORDS
  IN DEFENCE OF THIS WORK.

The usual summary cannot henceforth be long; strictly speaking three
sentences would suffice to trace it:

Incessant annoyance.

Absolute seclusion.

Infallible destruction.

The remainder of Napoleon’s existence will only be a cruel and prolonged
agony.

It has already been seen that the arrival of a new Governor became for
us the signal of the commencement of a life of misery. A few days had
sufficed to unfold his disposition; and, soon afterwards, the annoyances
and insults of which he made himself the instrument, or which he himself
created, were carried to the highest pitch. He rendered us an object of
terror to the inhabitants—he subjected us to the most cruel vexations—he
forbade us to write, without a previous communication with him, even to
those persons with whom he did not prevent us from conversing without
restraint—he invited _General Bonaparte_ to dine at his table, to shew
him to a lady of rank who was for a short time on the island—he arrested
one of our servants.

He now produces a despatch, in pursuance of which he endeavours to
oblige the Emperor to go into “the meanest details of his wants,” as
Napoleon expressed it, and to discuss them with him; he importunes the
Emperor to give money which he does not possess; and, by dint of
reductions in the common necessaries of life, obliges him to break up
and sell his plate, determining at the same time, by his authority as
Governor, the rate at which it is to be sold, and the person who is to
purchase it. He ridiculously restricts us to one bottle of wine per
head, including the Emperor. “He cheapens our existence,” said the
Emperor; “he grudges me the air I breathe, and what he sends to us for
our subsistence is sometimes, nay frequently, so bad that we are obliged
to apply for provisions to the neighbouring camp!!” &c.

He lays a snare for Napoleon, and exults in the hope of being able to
impart to him, personally and pompously, a communication which he calls
a ministerial order, but which is so outrageous that he refuses to leave
a copy of it; he prescribes to the Emperor the most absurd regulations;
he capriciously, and with bitter irony, contracts the space of his usual
limits; chalks out the trace of his footsteps; and even goes so far as
to attempt to regulate the nature of his conversations and the tenour of
his expressions; he surrounds us with trenches, palisadoes, and
redoubts; he obliges each of us individually, in order to be allowed to
remain with the Emperor, to sign a declaration that we submit to all
these restrictions; he makes use of us as instruments to degrade the
Emperor, by obliging us to call him _Bonaparte_, under pain of being
immediately removed from his person and instantly sent out of the
island, &c.

The Emperor, provoked by such disgraceful usage and such gratuitous
insults, opens his mind without reserve to Sir Hudson Lowe; his words
know no restraint; he frees himself for ever from his odious presence,
and declares that he never will see him again. “The most unworthy
proceeding of the English ministers,” said the Emperor to him, “is not
to have sent me here, but to have delivered me into your hands. I
complained of the admiral your predecessor; but he at least had a
heart!... You are a disgrace to your nation, and your name will for ever
be a stain upon its character!... This Governor,” the Emperor would
frequently say to us, “has nothing of an Englishman in his composition;
he is nothing but a worthless _sbire_ of Sicily. I at first complained
that a gaoler had been sent to me; but I now affirm that they have sent
me an executioner,” &c.

I have recorded these expressions, and I might mention many more,
however harsh they may be. 1st, Because I heard them uttered. 2dly,
Because Napoleon used them in speaking to Sir Hudson Lowe in person, or
caused them to be repeated to him. 3dly and lastly, Because they were
deserved, on account of the arbitrary, oppressive, and brutal manner, in
which the Governor, to the great scandal of the English themselves who
were on the spot, and who then manifested their disgust at his conduct,
abused the power with which he was invested in the name of a Nation so
eminently distinguished all over the globe, of a Prince so universally
respected in Europe, and of a Cabinet in which there were still some
honourable characters, men personally known by their moderation and
their elegant manners.

The vexations by which Napoleon was assailed were incessant; they
pursued him at every moment of his existence. Not a day passed without
the infliction of a fresh wound; and one of the torments recorded in
fabulous history may be said to have been thus realized.

Ah! if, during that period of affliction for so many generous hearts,
the Genius of Europe, the Genius of Truth, and the Genius of History,
have ever turned even involuntarily towards St. Helena, and the great
Napoleon; if they have sought for him in that island which they thought
it would be right to attempt, at least, to turn into a kind of Elysium
for him; what must have been their indignation to see him, in the bright
glory of so many immortal actions, chained like Prometheus to a rock,
and, like him, under the claws of a vulture, which delights in tearing
him to pieces!!! O infamy! O eternal disgrace!...

During this period the Emperor’s health has been constantly and
considerably declining; his body, which was thought so robust, which had
endured so many toils, and withstood so much fatigue, supported by
victory and glory, was now bending under the weight of infirmities
prematurely brought on by the injustice of men. Almost every day he is
attacked by some new indisposition; fever, swelled face, symptoms of
scurvy, constant colds; his features are altered, his gait becomes
heavy, his legs swelled, &c.... Our hearts were torn in seeing him thus
hastening towards infallible destruction; all our cares are in vain.

He had long since given up riding on horseback, and by degrees, also, he
almost entirely relinquished his rides in the calash. Even walking
became a rare occurrence, and he was thus nearly reduced to a strict
seclusion in his apartments. He no longer applied to any regular or
continued occupation; he seldom dictated to us, and only upon subjects
that were merely the fancy of the moment. He spent the greatest part of
the day alone in his room, busied in turning over a few books, or rather
doing nothing. Let those who have formed a due estimate of the power of
his faculties appreciate the strength of mind required to enable him to
bear, with equanimity, the intolerable burden of a life so wearisome and
monotonous; for, in our presence, he always exhibited the same serenity
of countenance and equality of temper. His mind appeared equally
unembarrassed; his conversation offered the same lively turns of
expression, and he was sometimes even inclined to mirth and humour; but,
in the privacy of intimate intercourse, it was easy to perceive that he
no longer thought of the future, meditated on the past, or cared about
the present. He merely yielded a passive obedience to the physical laws
of Nature, and, thoroughly disgusted with life, he perhaps secretly
sighed for the moment which was to put an end to it.

Such was the state of affairs when I was forcibly removed from Longwood;
for that period approaches—it is not far distant.

I have not noted down in the course of my Journal every minute
circumstance of our quarrels with the Governor, or the numerous official
communications that were exchanged between us. I have also omitted to
mention all the shameful privations to which we were exposed, in respect
to the necessaries and comforts of life. My object has been to show
Napoleon’s character in its true light, and not to write the history of
Longwood, and the catalogue of its miseries. Those who have any
curiosity on that score may seek for details in the work of Mr. O’Meara.
It would have argued meanness in me, who was one of the victims, had I
dwelt upon them; but for the Doctor, who was only a witness, who was a
stranger to us, and in some degree one of the adverse party, he can
only, situated as he is, have been actuated in so doing by the impulse
of a powerful feeling, and of generous indignation, which does honour to
his heart.

I have just heard (1824) that the late governor of St. Helena has
brought an action against Mr. O’Meara for defamation and calumny. I have
the highest respect for the Judges who preside over the principal courts
of justice in England, because I know how they are composed; but how can
one, in these days, be certain of the result of such an action? In the
unfortunate political effervescence of our times, truth appears, as it
were, in two lights at the same time; the true light is, for every
individual, that which exists in his own heart; for, after all, it is
impossible to impose upon one’s self, and that reflection will, no
doubt, be a motive of consolation to Mr. O’Meara, whatever the result
may be. And I must here declare that all the facts which I have seen
stated in Mr. O’Meara’s work, on the above-mentioned points, and which
fell under my knowledge while I was at St. Helena, are strictly true;
and thence I naturally conclude, by analogy, that the remainder, which I
have not seen, is also true. I, therefore, do not hesitate to say that I
consider it as such in my heart and conscience.

Whilst writing this, I have received from Sir Hudson Lowe some extracts
of confidential letters which, he informs me, he received at the time
from Mr. O’Meara, in which, he observes to me, O’Meara spoke of me in a
very improper manner, and made secret reports to him respecting me. What
can have been the intention of Sir Hudson Lowe in acting thus with me?
Considering the terms on which we are together, he cannot have been
prompted by a very tender interest. Did he wish to prove to me that Mr.
O’Meara acted as a spy for him upon us? Did he hope so far to prepossess
me against him as to influence the nature and the force of my testimony
in favour of his adversary? And, after all, are these letters in their
original state? have they not been altered after the fashion of St.
Helena? But, even supposing their meaning to be true and explicit, in
what respect can they offend me? What claim had I then on Mr. O’Meara’s
indulgence? what right had I to expect it? It is true that, at a later
period, after his return to Europe, seeing him persecuted and punished
on account of the humanity of his conduct towards Napoleon, I wrote to
him to express my heartfelt gratitude, and to offer him an asylum in my
family, should injustice compel him to leave his own country; that he
was welcome to share with me. But at St. Helena I hardly knew him, and I
do not believe that I spoke to him ten times during my residence at
Longwood. I considered him as being opposed to me by nation, by
opinions, and by interest: such was the nature of my connexion with Mr.
O’Meara. He was, therefore, entirely at liberty with respect to me: he
might _then_ write whatever he thought proper, and it cannot now vary
the opinion which I have since formed of him. Sir Hudson Lowe intends
now to insinuate that Mr. O’Meara was a double and a triple spy at the
same moment, viz. for the Government, for Napoleon, and for him, Sir
Hudson Lowe; but does that disprove the truth and destroy the
authenticity of the facts mentioned in his book? On the contrary. And
from which of the three parties could he expect to be rewarded for
revealing these facts to the public? Napoleon is no more; he can expect
nothing from him: and his publication has rendered the two others his
bitter enemies, who have deprived him of his situation, and threaten to
disturb his repose; for his real crime, in their eyes, is the warm zeal,
which he has displayed, of a friend to the laws and to decorum; who,
indignant at the mean and indecorous vexations to which Napoleon had
been exposed, drags the true authors of them to light, in order to
exculpate his country. I have, therefore, considered this tardy
communication of the confidential letters which Sir Hudson Lowe has just
transmitted to me, at the moment of his action against O’Meara, as a
kind of interested accusation, which every one will qualify as he thinks
proper. I have never even acknowledged the receipt of these letters; and
still less have I ever thought of complaining of their contents.

            NAPOLEON’S VIEWS AND INTENTIONS WITH RESPECT TO
                THE RUSSIAN WAR.—OFFICIAL INSTRUCTIONS.

Friday, Oct. 25.—I attended the Emperor at his toilette. The weather was
tolerably fine, and he went out, and walked as far as the wood. He was
very feeble; for it was now ten days since he had stirred out. He felt a
weakness in his knees; and remarked, that he should soon be obliged to
lean on me for support.

Passing to other topics, he made many observations on the Russian war.
Among other things he said: “That war should have been the most popular
of any in modern times. It was a war of good sense and true interests; a
war for the repose and security of all; it was purely pacific and
preservative; entirely European and continental. Its success would have
established a balance of power and would have introduced new
combinations, by which the dangers of the present time would have been
succeeded by future tranquillity. In this case, ambition had no share in
my views. In raising Poland, which was the key-stone of the whole arch,
I would have permitted a King of Prussia, an Archduke of Austria, or any
other to occupy the throne. I had no wish to obtain any new acquisition;
and I reserved for myself only the glory of doing good, and the
blessings of posterity. Yet this undertaking failed, and proved my ruin,
though I never acted more disinterestedly, and never better merited
success. As if popular opinion had been seized with contagion, in a
moment, a general outcry, a general sentiment, arose against me. I was
proclaimed the destroyer of kings—I, who had created them! I was
denounced as the subverter of the rights of nations—I, who was about to
risk all to secure them! And people and kings, those irreconcileable
enemies, leagued together and conspired against me! All the acts of my
past life were now forgotten. I said, truly, that popular favour would
return to me with victory; but victory escaped me, and I was ruined.
Such is mankind, and such is my history; but both people and kings will
have cause to regret me; and my memory will be sufficiently avenged for
the injustice committed upon me: that is certain.”

If certain passages in the above conversation of Napoleon should require
illustration or proof, these will be found in the following letter. The
document is highly valuable on account of its date and contents; for the
motives and views of the Russian expedition are here developed by
Napoleon at the moment when he was about to embark in the enterprise.
The vulgar were certainly far from comprehending or rendering justice to
his intentions; I say the vulgar, for it is just to remark that, among
statesmen and men of foresight and extended views, the Russian war was
very popular. They disapproved of the moment at which it was undertaken;
but they fully appreciated all the grand designs of the Emperor.

              INSTRUCTIONS GIVEN TO M—--, TO SERVE AS HIS
               GUIDE IN THE MISSION WHICH HE WILL HAVE TO
                  FULFIL IN POLAND. (APRIL 18, 1812.)

“SIR,—The high opinion which the Emperor entertains of your fidelity and
talent induces him to advance you so far in his confidence, as to
intrust you with a mission of the utmost political interest. This
mission will require _activity, prudence, and discretion_.

“You are to proceed to Dresden. The ostensible object of your journey
will be to present to the King of Saxony a letter, which the Emperor
will deliver to you to-morrow after his levee. His Imperial and Royal
Majesty has already acquainted you with his intentions; he will
communicate to you verbally his final instructions respecting the
overtures which you are to make to the King of Saxony.

“It is the Emperor’s intention that the King of Saxony should be treated
with all the consideration to which he is entitled, from the particular
esteem which his Majesty entertains for him personally. You will explain
yourself both to the King and his Ministers, with unreserved candour;
and you will give credit to the hints you may receive from the Count de
St. Pilsac.

“With respect to Saxony, there will be _no sacrifice without
compensation_.

“Saxony attaches but little importance to the sovereignty of the Duchy
of Warsaw, as it now exists: it is a precarious and troublesome
possession. The sovereignty of that fragment of Poland places Saxony in
a false position with regard to Prussia, Austria, and Russia. You will
develop these ideas, and treat this question in the way in which it was
discussed in your presence, in his Majesty’s closet, on the 17th. You
will find the cabinet of Dresden not much inclined to oppose you; its
diplomacy has presented to us the same observations, on several previous
occasions. The matter in question is not the dismemberment of the
dominions of the King of Saxony.

“After a short stay at Dresden, you will announce your departure for
Warsaw; _where you will await new orders from the Emperor_.

“His Imperial Majesty begs that the King of Saxony will accredit you to
his Polish Ministers.

“At Warsaw, you will concert your measures with Prince ...., the
Emperor’s chamberlain, and with General ..... These two persons, who are
descended from the most illustrious Polish families, have promised to
exercise the influence they possess among their fellow citizens, to
induce them to exert every effort for securing the happiness and
independence of their country. You must communicate to the government of
the Grand Duchy an impulse calculated to prepare the great changes which
the Emperor proposes to make in favour of the Polish nation.

“It is necessary that the Poles should second the designs of the
Emperor, and co-operate in their own regeneration. _They must consider
France only as an auxiliary power._

“The Emperor is aware of the difficulties he will have to encounter, in
his endeavours to bring about the re-establishment of Poland. That great
political work will oppose the _apparent and immediate interests of his
allies_.

“The re-establishment of Poland, by the arms of the French Empire, is a
hazardous and even a perilous enterprise, in which France will have to
contend against her friends as well as her enemies. We will enter into a
few details on this point.

“The object which the Emperor has in view is the organization of Poland,
_with the whole or a portion of her old territory_; and he wishes, if
possible, to effect this object without engaging in war. In furtherance
of this design, his Majesty has granted very extensive powers to his
ambassador at St. Petersburg: he has sent to Vienna a negotiator,
authorized to treat with the principal powers, and to offer great
sacrifices in territory, on the part of the French Empire, _by way of
indemnity for the cessions to be made for the re-establishment of the
kingdom of Poland_.

“Europe consists of three great divisions: in the west, the French
Empire; in the centre, the German States; and in the east, the Russian
Empire. England can have no more influence on the continent than the
Powers think fit to allow her.

“A strong organization of the centre will be necessary as a
precautionary measure, lest Russia or France should one day, in order to
extend their power, attempt to gain the supremacy in Europe. The French
Empire is now in the enjoyment of the full energy of her existence: if
she does not, at this moment, complete the political constitution of
Europe, to-morrow she may lose the advantages of her situation, and fail
in her enterprises.

“The conversion of Prussia into a military state, the reign and
conquests of Frederick the Great, the opinions of the age, and those of
the French revolution, have annihilated the Germanic Confederation. The
Confederation of the Rhine is only part of a provisional system. The
Princes who have been gainers would probably wish for the consolidation
of that system; but those who have been losers, the people, who have
suffered from the calamities of war, and the states which dread the too
great increase of the French power, will seize every opportunity of
opposing the maintenance of the Rhinish Confederation. Even the Princes
who have been aggrandized by the new system will seek to withdraw
themselves from it, as soon as time shall establish them in the
possessions they have obtained. France will, in the end, find herself
deprived of a protectorate, which, certainly, she will have purchased by
too many sacrifices.

“The Emperor is of opinion that, ultimately, at a period which cannot be
far distant, it will be proper to restore the states of Europe to their
complete independence.

“The House of Austria, which possesses three extensive kingdoms, must be
the soul of this independence, on account of the topographical situation
of its States; but it must not be the ruling power. In case of a rupture
between the two Empires of France and Russia, if the Confederation of
the intermediate Powers were actuated by one and the same impulse, the
ruin of one of the contending parties would necessarily ensue. The
French Empire would be more exposed to danger than the Russian Empire.

“The centre of Europe must be composed of states unequal in power, and
each possessing its own peculiar system of policy. These states, from
their situation and political relations, will seek support in the
protection of the preponderating powers; and they will be interested in
the maintenance of peace, because they must always be the victims of
war. With these views, after raising up new states and aggrandizing old
ones, in order to fortify our system of alliance for the future, the
establishment of Poland is an object of the utmost interest to the
Emperor and to Europe. If the Kingdom of Poland be not restored, Europe
will be without a frontier on that point; and Austria and Germany will
be face to face with the most powerful Empire in the world.

“The Emperor foresees that Poland, like Prussia, will ultimately become
the ally of Russia; but, if Poland should owe her restoration to France,
the period of the union of the above-mentioned states will be
sufficiently remote to afford time for the consolidation of the
established order of things. Europe being thus organized, there will no
longer be any cause of rivalry between France and Russia: these two
Empires will have the same commercial interests, and will act in
conformity with the same principles.

“Before the coolness with Prussia, the Emperor’s first intention was to
form a solid alliance with the King of Prussia, and to place the crown
of Poland on his head. There were then few obstacles to be surmounted:
for Prussia was already in possession of one-third of Poland; Russia
would have been left in possession of what she might have insisted on
retaining; and indemnities would have been granted to Austria. But the
progress of events occasioned the Emperor to alter his intentions.

“At the time of the negotiations of Tilsit, it was found necessary to
create states precisely in those countries which most dreaded the power
of France. The moment was favourable for the re-establishment of Poland,
though it would have been the work of violence and force. The war must
have been prolonged; the French army was suffering from cold and want;
and Russia had armies on foot. The Emperor was touched by the generous
sentiments which the Emperor Alexander manifested towards him. He
experienced obstacles on the part of Austria; and he suffered his policy
to be overruled by the desire of signing a peace, which he hoped to have
rendered lasting, if, through the influence of Russia and Austria,
England could have been prevailed on to consent to a general
reconciliation.

“Prussia, after her reverses, manifested such a spirit of hatred towards
France that it was deemed necessary to diminish her power. With this
view, the Grand Duchy of Warsaw was created. It was placed under the
dominion of the King of Saxony, a prince whose whole life had been
devoted to the happiness of his subjects. Endeavours were made to
conciliate the Poles, by the establishment of institutions agreeable to
their tastes, and conformable with their manners and national character.
But all was badly managed.

“Saxony, separated from her new possessions by Prussia, could not, with
Poland, constitute a body sufficiently organized to become strong and
powerful. The opening of a military road through the Prussian territory,
to communicate between Saxony and Poland, greatly humbled the Prussians;
and the Poles complained of disappointed hopes.

“The Emperor stipulated for the occupation of the fortresses of Prussia,
in order to ensure the certainty that that power would not seek to
re-kindle the torch of war. The campaign of 1809 proved the prudence of
his policy. He adopted the firm resolution of labouring unremittingly to
complete the system of organization in Europe, which was calculated to
put a period to disastrous wars.

“The Emperor conceived that he must appear formidable, from the number
of troops which he has marched towards the Vistula, and from the
occupation of the fortresses of Prussia; measures which were necessary
for ensuring the fidelity of his allies, and obtaining, by means of
negotiations, what, perhaps, he can after all secure only by war.

“The dangers of the present circumstances are immense. The removal of
armies to the distance of five hundred leagues from their native
territory, cannot be unattended by risk; and Poland must rely as much on
her own exertions as on the support of the Emperor. I once more repeat
that, if war should ensue, the Poles must consider France only as an
auxiliary, operating in aid of their own resources. Let them call to
mind the time when, by their patriotism and courage, they resisted the
numerous armies which assailed their independence.

“The people of the Grand Duchy wish for the re-establishment of Poland;
it is for them to prepare the means by which the usurped provinces may
be enabled to declare their wishes. The government of the Grand Duchy
must, as soon as circumstances permit, combine, under the banner of
independence, the dismembered fragments of their unfortunate country.
Should it happen that any natives of Poland, under the dominion of
Russia or Austria, shall refuse to return to the mother country, no
attempt must be made to compel them to do so. Poland must derive her
strength from her public spirit and patriotism, as well as from the
institutions which will constitute the new social state.

“The object of your mission, therefore, is to enlighten, encourage, and
direct the Polish patriots in their operations. You will render an
account of your negotiations to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, who
will acquaint the Emperor with your progress; and you will send me
abstracts of your reports.

“The misfortunes and weakness of the Polish republic were occasioned by
an aristocracy, which knew neither law nor restraint. At that period, as
at present, the nobility were powerful; the citizens oppressed; and the
great mass of the people nothing. But, even amidst these disorders, a
love of liberty and independence prevailed in Poland, and long supported
her feeble existence. These sentiments must have been strengthened by
time and oppression. Patriotism is a feeling natural to the Poles; it
exists even among members of the great families. The Emperor will
fulfil, unconditionally, the promise he made, in Art. 25, of the treaty
of the 9th of July, 1807, to govern the Grand Duchy by laws calculated
to ensure the liberty and privileges of the people, and consistent with
the tranquillity of the neighbouring states. Poland shall enjoy _liberty
and independence_. As to the choice of her sovereign, that point will be
decided by the treaty which his Majesty will sign with the other Powers.
His Majesty lays no claim to the throne of Poland, either for himself or
any of his family. In the great work of the restoration of Poland, he
has only in view the happiness of the Poles and the tranquillity of
Europe. His Majesty authorizes you to make this declaration; and to make
it formally, whenever you conceive it may be useful for the interests of
France and Poland.

“His Majesty has ordered me to transmit to you this note, and these
instructions, in order that you may make them the subjects of
conversation with the foreign ministers, who may be at Warsaw or
Dresden.

“The Emperor has ordered notes to be forwarded to the Ministers of War
and Foreign Affairs, of the Grand Duchy. Should pecuniary resources be
wanted, his Majesty will assist the Polish treasury by assignments on
the extraordinary domains, which he still possesses in Poland and
Hanover.”

           THE EMPEROR INDISPOSED.—ANECDOTES OF THE INTERIOR
                           OF THE TUILERIES.

26th.—I was informed that the Emperor was very unwell, and that he
desired I would attend him. I found him in his chamber, with a
handkerchief bound round his head; he was seated in an arm-chair, beside
a great fire, which he had ordered to be kindled. “What,” said he, “is
the severest disorder, the most acute pain, to which human nature is
subject?” I replied, “That the pain of the present moment always
appeared to be the most severe.”—“Then it is the tooth-ache,” said he.
He had a violent secretion of saliva, and his right cheek was much
swelled and inflamed. I was alone in attendance on him, and I
alternately warmed a flannel and a napkin, which he kept constantly
applied to the part affected, and he said he felt greatly relieved by
it. He was also affected by a severe nervous cough, and occasional
yawning and shivering, which denoted approaching fever.

“What a miserable thing is man!” said he, “the smallest fibre in his
body, assailed by disease, is sufficient to derange his whole system! On
the other hand, in spite of all the maladies to which he is subject, it
is sometimes necessary to employ the executioner to put an end to him.
What a curious machine is this earthly clothing! And, perhaps, I may be
confined in it for thirty years longer!”

He attributed his tooth-ache to his late drive, as he had felt
singularly affected by being out in the open air. “Nature is always the
best counsellor,” said he; “I went out in spite of my inclination, and
only in obedience to reason.”

The Doctor arrived, and he found that his patient manifested symptoms of
fever. The Emperor spent the remainder of the day in his chamber,
occasionally suffering severely from the tooth-ache. At intervals, when
the pain abated, he walked up and down, between his armchair and the
sofa, and conversed on different subjects.

At one time, he alluded to the base conduct of some of the persons who
had been about him, during his power. A family, who were established in
the interior of the palace, who had been loaded with benefits, and who,
it may be added, behaved most disgracefully at the period of the
catastrophe, were one day detected in some offence or other by the
Emperor himself. He merely reproached them with their misconduct,
instead of punishing them for it. “But what was the consequence?” said
he, “this only served to irritate them, without affording a just
example. When things are done by halves, they will always prove
ineffectual. The fault must not be seen; or if seen, it must be
punished,” &c.

He next mentioned a woman, who, together with her husband, held a very
lucrative situation, and who was constantly complaining to him of her
poverty. “She often wrote to me,” said the Emperor, “to ask for money,
as though she had claims upon me; just as Madame Bertrand, or any of you
might do, on your return from St. Helena.”

Alluding to a person who had behaved very ill to him in 1814, he said:
“Probably you will suppose that he fled on my return? No such thing; on
the contrary, I was beset by him. He very coolly acknowledged that he
had felt a transient attachment for the Bourbons, for which, however, he
assured me he had been severely punished. But this, he said, had served
only to revive the natural affection which all so justly entertained for
me. I spurned him from me; and I have good reason to believe, that he is
now at the feet of the Royal family, relating all sorts of horrors about
me. Poor human nature, always and everywhere alike!”

Finally, he mentioned a most infamous intrigue, which was set on foot by
persons on whom he had lavished favours. These persons endeavoured to
prevail on the Empress Josephine to sign a most degrading letter, under
pretence of securing her a tranquil residence in France, but doubtless
with the real purpose of gaining credit to themselves in another
quarter. The letter, which was to have been addressed to the King,
contained a disavowal of all that she had formerly been, and what she
still was, together with a request that the King would provide for her
as he pleased, &c. The Empress wept, and resisted the importunity, asked
for time, and consulted the Emperor Alexander, who told her that such a
letter would utterly disgrace her. He advised her to dismiss the
meddling intriguers by whom she was surrounded; assured her that there
was no intention of removing her from France, or disturbing her quiet in
any way; and promised to be responsible for her himself in case of
necessity.

In the evening, the Emperor felt better, and he enjoyed a little sleep.
His countenance bore evident marks of the severe pain he had suffered.

              THE EMPEROR CONTINUES INDISPOSED.—IMMORALITY
                    THE WORST FAULT IN A SOVEREIGN.

27th.—The Emperor passed the whole day beside the fire, sometimes
reclining on his couch, and sometimes sitting in his arm-chair. He still
suffered very much from head-ache and tooth-ache, and the secretion of
saliva had not diminished. He again had recourse to warm flannel and
napkins, by the use of which he had yesterday experienced a little
relief. I warmed them, and applied them in the same manner as before.
The Emperor appeared very sensible to the attentions I shewed him, and
several times laying his hand on my shoulder, he said, “My dear Las
Cases, you relieve me very much!” The pain subsided, and he slept for a
short time; then, raising his eyes, he said to me, “Have I been long
asleep? Are you not very much fatigued?” He called me his _frère
hospitalier, the knight hospitaller of St. Helena_. But the pain soon
returned with violence, and he sent for the Doctor, who found him
feverish. He was seized with the chillness which had attacked him on the
preceding day, and which obliged him to keep close to the fire.

He continued in the same state through the whole of the evening. About
seven o’clock, he proposed going to bed. He would not eat anything; but
he ordered his valet to toast some bread, and he himself made a little
toast and water, in which he put some sugar and orange-flower-water.

In the course of the evening’s conversation, the following remarks fell
from the Emperor. “Immorality,” said he, “is, beyond doubt, the worst of
all faults in a Sovereign; because he introduces it as a fashion among
his subjects, by whom it is practised for the sake of pleasing him. It
strengthens every vice, blights every virtue, and infects all society
like a pestilence: in short, it is the scourge of a nation. Public
morality, on the contrary, added he, is the natural compliment of the
laws: it is a whole code in itself.” He declared that the Revolution, in
spite of all its horrors, had nevertheless been the true cause of the
regeneration of morals in France, “as the noblest vegetation is the
offspring of the filthiest manure.” He did not hesitate to affirm that
his government would mark the memorable epoch of the return to morality.
“We advanced at full sail,” said he; “but, doubtless, the catastrophes
which have ensued will, in a great measure, turn all back; for, amidst
so many vicissitudes and disorders, it is difficult to resist the
various temptations that arise, the allurements of intrigue and
cupidity, and the suggestions of venality. However, the rising impulse
of improvement may be impeded and repressed, but not destroyed. Public
morality belongs especially to the dominion of reason and information,
of which it is the natural result; and reason and information cannot
again retrograde. The scandalous turpitude of former ages, the double
adulteries, and libertinism of the Regency, and the profligacy of the
succeeding reign, cannot again be revived, unless the circumstances
under which they existed should again return; and that is impossible.
Before such a change can take place, the upper classes of society must
again degenerate into a state of absolute idleness, so as to have no
other occupation than licentiousness; the spirit of industry, which now
animates and elevates the minds of people in the middle ranks, must be
destroyed; and finally, the lower classes must be again plunged into
that state of subjection and degradation which once reduced them to the
level of mere beasts of burden. Now, all this is henceforth impossible:
public morals are, therefore, on the rise; and it may be safely
predicted that they will gradually improve all over the world.”

About nine o’clock, after the Emperor had retired to bed, he desired
that all his suite might come to his apartment. The Grand Marshal and
his lady were among the number. The Emperor conversed with us for half
an hour; the curtains being drawn round his bed.

         THE EMPEROR STILL UNWELL.—WANT OF MEDICINES.—SERVAN’S
                 GUERRES D’ITALIE.—MADAME DE MONTESSON.

28th.—When I rose in the morning, I felt ill, and wished to bathe my
feet; but no water could be procured for that purpose. I mention this
circumstance to afford an idea, if possible, of our real situation at
Longwood. Water has always been very scarce here; but there is less now
than ever, and we consider ourselves singularly fortunate when we are
able to procure a bath for the Emperor. We are no better provided with
other things necessary in medical treatment. Yesterday, the Doctor was
mentioning, in the Emperor’s presence, drugs, instruments, and remedies
of various kinds; but, as he enumerated each article, he added:
“Unfortunately, there is none to be procured on the Island.”—“Then,”
said the Emperor, “when they sent us hither, they took it for granted
that we should be always well?” Indeed we are in want of the veriest
trifles and necessaries. As a substitute for a warming-pan, the Emperor
has been obliged to have holes bored in one of the large silver dishes,
used for keeping the meat warm at table, which is now filled with coals,
and used for the purpose of warming his bed.—For some time past, he has
very much felt the want of spirits of wine, by means of which, he might
have warmed his drink.

The Emperor has continued unwell the whole of the day: his face is still
very much swelled, but the pain has somewhat abated. On entering his
chamber, I found him sitting by the fire, reading the _Guerres
d’Italie_, by Servan. The work suggested to him the idea of some
additions to our valuable chapters on Italy. He ordered the map to be
brought to him. I was very much surprised to find that the author, in
descending to our own times, and narrating the campaigns of the Emperor
himself, was exceedingly imperfect in his descriptions, and seemed to be
unacquainted with the country about which he wrote. “This,” said the
Emperor, “is because he passed on, without observing; and, perhaps he
would not have been capable of understanding, even had he observed. But
the true spirit of great enterprises and great results consists in the
art of divining even without seeing.”

The Emperor found himself obliged to retire to bed as early as he did
yesterday. He felt chilly, and seemed to be threatened with another
attack of fever; he also felt symptoms of cramp. A little soup was the
only nourishment he had taken since yesterday. He complained that his
bed was badly made, and that every thing seemed to be wrong; the
bed-clothes were not arranged as he wished, and he ordered them to be
spread out differently. He remarked that all who surrounded him had
calculated on his preserving his health, and that they would certainly
be very inexperienced and awkward, should he happen to be attacked with
a serious fit of illness.

He ordered some tea to be made of orange-tree leaves, for which he had
to wait a considerable time. During the delay, he evinced a degree of
patience of which I should certainly have been incapable.

He conversed, when in bed, on the early years of his life which he spent
at Brienne, the Duke of Orleans, and Madame de Montesson, whom he
recollected having seen. He spoke also of the families of Nogent and
Brienne, who were connected with the circumstances of his youth.

“When I was raised to the head of the government,” said Napoleon,
“Madame de Montesson applied to me for permission to take the title of
Duchess of Orleans, which appeared to me an extremely ridiculous
request.” The Emperor had supposed that she was only the mistress of the
Prince; but I assured him that she had really been married to the Duke,
with the consent of Louis XVI., and that, after the death of her
husband, she always signed herself the Duchess Dowager of Orleans. The
Emperor said he had been ignorant of that circumstance. “But, at all
events,” said he, “what had the First Consul to do with the business?
This was always my answer to the persons interested in the case, who
were, however, not much satisfied with me. But was it to be expected
that I should adopt, immediately, all the irregularities and absurdities
of the old school?”

              THE EMPEROR STILL INDISPOSED.—CHARACTERISTIC
                             CIRCUMSTANCES.

29th.—My son was ill, and I was myself by no means well, being still
troubled with restlessness during the night. The Doctor came to see us.
He informed me that the Emperor was better; but that he was wrong in
refusing to take medicine.

The Emperor did not send for me until five o’clock. He still complained
of a violent pain in his head. He had his feet in water, and he
experienced a little relief from this kind of half bath. He lay down on
the sofa, and took up the Memoirs of Noailles, from which he read aloud
several passages, concerning the Duke de Vendome, the siege of Lille,
and some others relative to the Duke of Berwick; all of which he
accompanied by remarks in his own style,—novel, original, and striking.
I very much regret that I am unable to record them here; but, as I had
not made a fair copy of these latter sheets of my journal, when the
manuscript was seized, I have now only the assistance of memoranda,
frequently referring to circumstances which time has obliterated from my
recollection.

The Emperor, observing on his drawers some confectionary, or sweetmeats,
which had been accidentally left there, he desired me to bring them to
him; and, seeing that I hesitated, and felt embarrassed, as to how I
should present them, he said, “Take them in your hand; there is no need
of ceremony or form between us now; we must henceforth be messmates.”
Though this is a trifling circumstance, yet, to some, it will develope,
more forcibly than volumes of description, the real turn of mind,
character, and disposition, of the extraordinary individual to whom it
relates: for men of judgment and observation will perceive, and draw
conclusions, when others would not even form an idea. This consideration
has induced me to insert in these volumes many things which I had
originally intended to reject, through the fear that they might be
thought insignificant, or, at all events, useless.

I have already mentioned that, in his moments of good-humoured
familiarity, the Emperor was accustomed to salute me with all sorts of
titles, such as “Good morning, _Monseigneur_. How is _your Excellency_?
What says _your Lordship_ to-day?” &c. One evening, when I was going to
the drawing-room, the usher was about to open the door for me, when, at
the same moment, the door of the Emperor’s apartment also opened: he was
going thither too. I stepped aside to let him pass; and he, no doubt in
a fit of abstraction, stopped me, and seizing me by the ear, said,
playfully: “Well; where is _your Majesty_ going?” But the words had no
sooner been uttered, than he immediately let go my ear, and, assuming a
grave expression of countenance, he began to talk to me on some serious
topic. I had, it is true, learned to close my ears when it was
necessary; but the Emperor was evidently sorry for having suffered the
expression, _your Majesty_, to escape him. He seemed to think that
though other titles might be used in jest, yet the case was very
different with the one he had just employed; both on account of its own
peculiar nature, and the circumstances in which we were placed. Be this
as it may, the reader may form what conjecture he pleases; I merely
relate the fact.

After dinner, the Emperor received all his suite in his chamber. He was
in bed; and he began to talk of the little faith he placed in the virtue
of medicine. He observed that he used to support his opinions on this
subject with such strong arguments that Corvisart and other celebrated
physicians could but feebly oppose him, and that merely for the sake of
maintaining the honour of the profession.

            THE EMPEROR’S FIFTH DAY OF CONFINEMENT.—ANECDOTE
                  OF AN UNPAID BILL.—ON UNPOPULARITY.

30th.—The Emperor was no better to-day; and his periodical attack of
fever returned at the usual hour. He was troubled with pimples on his
lips and in his mouth, together with a sore throat, so that he felt pain
in speaking, and even in swallowing. When the Doctor came in the
evening, he brought with him a gargle for the Emperor’s throat: but it
was with difficulty we prevailed on him to use it. There is no oil to be
procured, fit for the Emperor’s use—it is execrable; and he is very
fastidious.

In the course of conversation to-day, the Emperor, in alluding to the
extravagance and debts of Josephine, mentioned that he himself, though
the most regular man in the world, with respect to money-matters, once
got into an unpleasant predicament at Saint-Cloud. “I was riding in my
calash,” said he, “along with the Empress, when, amidst an immense crowd
of people, I was accosted, in the Eastern style, as a Sultan might be
addressed on his way to the mosque, by one of my tradesmen, who demanded
a considerable sum of money, the payment of which had been, for a long
time, withheld from him. The man’s demand was just,” remarked Napoleon,
“and yet I was not to blame. I had paid the money at the proper time:
the intermediate agent was solely in fault.”

At another time, when alluding to the unpopularity of which, he said, he
had latterly been the object, I expressed my surprise that he had not
endeavoured to counteract the libels that were published against him,
and to recover popular favour. To this he replied, with an air of
inspiration: “I had higher objects in view than to concern myself about
flattering and courting a low multitude; a few insignificant coteries
and sects. I should have returned victorious from Moscow, and then not
only these people, but all France, and all the world, would have admired
and blessed me. I might then have withdrawn myself mysteriously from the
world, and popular credulity would have revived the fable of Romulus; it
would have been said that I had been carried up to heaven, to take my
place among the gods.”

About seven o’clock, the Emperor, finding himself very weak, retired to
bed. When our dinner was ended, he received us all in his chamber, as he
did yesterday; his bed-curtains being drawn. After a little desultory
conversation, he took a fancy to have Robinson Crusoe read to him. Each
of the gentlemen read a portion by turns, I alone being exempt, on
account of my bad eyes. After an hour or two spent in this way, the
Emperor took leave of us all, except the youngest of the party (General
Gourgaud), whom he detained for the purpose of reading and conversing
with him a little longer.

             THE EMPEROR VIOLATES THE DOCTOR’S ORDERS.—THE
               NAME OF THE GREAT NATION FIRST APPLIED TO
                          FRANCE BY NAPOLEON.

31st.—Fair weather had now returned: the day was delightful. The Emperor
had kept his chamber for six days: and, tired of the monotony of the
scene, he determined to disobey the Doctor’s orders. He went out; but he
felt himself so extremely weak that he was scarcely able to walk. He
ordered the calash, and we took a drive. He was silent and low-spirited,
and suffered considerable pain, particularly from the eruption on his
lips.

Shortly after his return, he desired me to attend him in his chamber. He
felt very weak and drowsy. I prevailed on him to eat a little; and he
also took a glass of wine, which, he said, somewhat revived him, and he
found himself better. He then entered into conversation.

“As soon as I set foot in Italy,” said he, “I wrought a change in the
manners, sentiments, and language, of our Revolution. I did not shoot
the emigrants; I protected the priests, and abolished those institutions
and festivals which were calculated to disgrace us. In so doing, I was
not guided by caprice, but by reason and equity—those two bases of
superior policy. For example,” continued he, addressing himself to an
individual present, “if the anniversary of the King’s death had always
been celebrated, you would never have had an opportunity for rallying.”

The Emperor remarked that he himself was the first who applied to France
the name of the _Great Nation_. “And certainly,” said he, “she justified
the distinction in the eyes of the prostrate world.” Then, after a short
pause, he added: “And she will yet deserve and retain that proud title,
if her national character should again rise to a level with her physical
advantages and her moral resources.”

On another occasion, speaking of a person to whom he was much attached,
he said, “His character resembles that of the _cow_; gentle and placid
in all things, except where his children are concerned. If any one
meddles with them, his horns are immediately thrust forward, and he may
be roused to a pitch of fury.”

Speaking of another, who had passed his thirtieth year, and whom he
happened to say was too young, he observed, “And yet, at that age, I had
made all my conquests, and I ruled the world. I had laid the
revolutionary storm, amalgamated hostile parties, rallied a nation,
established a government and an empire; in short, I wanted only the
title of Emperor. I have, it must be confessed,” added he, “been the
spoiled child of fortune. From my first entrance into life, I was
accustomed to exercise command; and circumstances and the force of my
own character were such that, as soon as I became possessed of power, I
acknowledged no master, and obeyed no laws, except those of my own
creating.”

           THE EMPEROR’S HEALTH DECLINES VISIBLY.—THE DOCTOR
           EXPRESSES ALARM.—FRENCH PRISONERS IN ENGLAND, &C.

Friday, November 1st.—To-day, the weather being very fine, the Emperor
went out about two o’clock. After walking a little in the garden, he
felt fatigued, and called at Madame Bertrand’s to rest himself. He sat
there, upwards of an hour, in an arm-chair, without saying a word, and
apparently suffering much from pain and weakness. He then returned
languidly to his chamber, where he threw himself on his sofa, and fell
into a slumber, as he did on the preceding day. I was very much
distressed to observe the state of extreme debility to which he was
reduced. He endeavoured to overcome his drowsiness; but he could neither
converse nor read. I withdrew, in order that he might take a little
rest.

An English frigate arrived from the Cape, on her way to Europe. This
circumstance has afforded us an opportunity of writing to our friends. I
have, however, denied myself the happiness of doing so; for the repeated
complaints of the Governor, together with the consequences with which I
was threatened, amount to an absolute prohibition of all correspondence
with Europe. Perhaps a more favourable moment may arrive. At all events,
I must be patient.

Doctor O’Meara called to see my son, who continued in a very precarious
state. He was again bled yesterday, and fainted three or four times in
the course of the day.

The Doctor took the opportunity of speaking to me on the subject of the
Emperor’s health, and he assured me that he was by no means free from
alarm as to the consequences of his confinement. He said that he was
continually urging the necessity of exercise; and he begged that I would
endeavour to prevail on the Emperor to go out more frequently. It was
obvious that an alarming change had taken place in him. The Doctor did
not hesitate to affirm that such complete confinement, after a life of
activity, would be attended with the worst consequences; since any
serious disorder, produced by the nature of the climate, or any accident
to which he might be exposed, would infallibly prove fatal to him. These
words, and the tone of anxiety in which they were uttered, deeply
affected me. From that moment, I observed the sincere interest which the
Doctor felt for Napoleon, and of which he has since afforded so many
proofs.

The Emperor sent for me about six o’clock. He was taking a bath; and he
appeared to be worse than when I had last seen him: this he attributed
to going out yesterday. He, however, experienced some benefit from the
bath; and he took up Lord Macartney’s Embassy to China, which he
continued reading for some time, making various observations as he
proceeded.

When he laid aside the book, he began to converse; and the situation of
the French prisoners in England was one of the subjects that happened to
come under discussion. I will here put together some remarks on this
subject that fell from the Emperor on the present and other occasions.

The sudden rupture of the treaty of Amiens, on such false pretences, and
with so much bad faith on the part of the English Ministry, greatly
irritated the First Consul, who conceived that he had been trifled with.
The seizure of several French merchant ships, even before war had been
declared, roused his indignation to the utmost. “To my urgent
remonstrances,” said the Emperor, “they coolly replied that it was a
practice they had always observed; and here they spoke truth. But the
time was gone by when France could tamely submit to such injustice and
humiliation. I had become the defender of her rights and glory, and I
was resolved to let our enemies know with whom they had to deal.
Unfortunately, owing to the reciprocal situation of the two countries, I
could only avenge one act of violence by another still greater. It was a
painful thing to be compelled to make reprisals on innocent men; but I
had no alternative.

“On reading the ironical and insolent reply that was returned to my
complaints, I, that very night, issued an order for arresting, in every
part of France, and in every territory occupied by the French, all
Englishmen, of every rank whatever, and detaining them as prisoners, by
way of reprisal for the unjust seizure of our ships. Most of these
English were men of rank and fortune, who were travelling for their
pleasure; but the more extraordinary the measure, the greater the
injustice, the better it suited my purpose. A general outcry was raised.
The English appealed to me; but I referred them to their own government,
on whose conduct alone their fate depended. Several of these individuals
proposed raising a subscription to pay for the ships that had been
seized, in the hope of thereby obtaining permission to return home. I,
however, informed them that I did not want money; but merely to obtain
justice and redress for an injury. Could it have been believed that the
English Government, as crafty and tenacious with respect to its maritime
rights as the Court of Rome is in its religious pretensions, suffered a
numerous and distinguished class of Englishmen to be unjustly detained
for ten years, rather than authentically renounce for the future an
odious system of maritime plunder.

“When I was first raised to the head of the consular government, I had
had a misunderstanding with the English Cabinet, on the subject of
prisoners of war; but I now carried my point. The Directory had been
weak enough to agree to an arrangement extremely injurious to France,
and entirely to the advantage of England.

“The English maintained their prisoners in France, and we had to
maintain ours in England. We had but few English prisoners; and the
French prisoners in England were exceedingly numerous: provisions were
to be had almost for nothing in France; and they were exorbitantly dear
in England. Thus the English had very trifling expenses to defray; while
we, on the other hand, had to send enormous sums into a foreign country;
and that at a time when we could but ill afford it. This arrangement,
moreover, required an exchange of agents between the respective
countries; and the English Commissioner proved to be neither more nor
less than a spy on the French Government; he was the go-between and
contriver of the plots that were hatched in the interior of France by
the emigrants abroad. No sooner was I made acquainted with this state of
things, than I erased the abuse by a stroke of the pen. The English
Government was informed that, thenceforward, each country must maintain
the prisoners it should make, unless an exchange were agreed upon. A
terrible outcry was raised, and a threat was held out that the French
prisoners should be suffered to die of starvation. I doubted not that
the English Ministers were sufficiently obstinate and inhuman to wish to
put this threat into execution; but I knew that any cruelty exercised
towards the prisoners would be repugnant to the feelings of the nation.
The English Government yielded the point. The situation of our
unfortunate prisoners was, indeed, neither better nor worse than it had
previously been; but, in other respects, we gained great advantages, and
got rid of an arrangement which placed us under a sort of yoke and
tribute.

“During the whole of the war, I incessantly made proposals for an
exchange of prisoners: but to this, the English Government, under some
pretence or other, constantly refused to accede, on the supposition that
it would be advantageous to me. I have nothing to say against this. In
war, policy must take place of feeling; but why exercise unnecessary
cruelty? And this is what the English Ministers unquestionably did, when
they found the number of prisoners increasing. Then commenced, for our
unfortunate countrymen, the odious system of confinement in hulks; a
species of torture, which the ancients would have added to the horrors
of the infernal regions, had their imaginations been capable of
conceiving it. I readily admit that there might be exaggeration on the
part of the accusers; but was the truth spoken by those who defended
themselves? We know what kind of thing a report to Parliament is. We can
form a correct idea of it, when we read the calumnies and falsehoods
that are uttered in Parliament, with such cool effrontery, by the base
men who have blushed not to become our executioners. Confinement on
board hulks is a thing that needs no explanation: the fact speaks for
itself. When it is considered that men, unaccustomed to live on
shipboard, were crowded together in little unwholesome cabins, too small
to afford them room to move; that, by way of indulgence, they were
permitted, twice during the twenty-four hours, to breathe pestilential
exhalations at ebb tide; and that this misery was prolonged for the
space of ten or twelve years;—the blood curdles at such an odious
picture of inhumanity! On this point, I blame myself for not having made
reprisals. It would have been well had I thrown into similar
confinement, not the poor sailors and soldiers, whose complaints would
never have been attended to, but all the English nobility and persons of
fortune who were then in France. I should have permitted them to
maintain free correspondence with their friends and families, and their
complaints would soon have assailed the ears of the English Ministers,
and checked their odious measures. Certain parties in Paris, who were
ever the best allies of the enemy, would, of course, have called me a
tiger and a cannibal; but no matter, I should have discharged my duty to
the French people, who had made me their protector and defender. In this
instance, my decision of character failed me.”

The Emperor asked me whether the French prisoners had been confined in
hulks at the time when I was in England. I could not positively inform
him; but I replied that I did not think they were, because I knew there
were prisons for them in various parts of the country, where many of the
English visited them, and purchased the productions of their industry. I
added that they were, in all probability, but ill provided for, and
exposed to many hardships; for a story used to be told of a government
agent having visited one of the prisons on horseback, and no sooner had
he alighted from his horse, and turned his back, than the poor animal
was seized, cut to pieces, and devoured by the prisoners. I did not, of
course, vouch for the fact; but the story was related by the English
themselves, and the ignorant and prejudiced class did not regard it as a
proof of the extreme misery to which the prisoners must have been
reduced, but merely as an example of their terrible voracity. The
Emperor laughed, and said he considered the anecdote to be a mere
fabrication; observing that, if the fact were to be relied on, it was
calculated to make human nature shudder; for, that nothing but hunger,
urged to madness, could drive men to such a dreadful extremity. I was
the more inclined to believe that the plan of confinement on board the
hulks had not been introduced when I was in England, because I
recollected that a great deal had been said about establishing the
French prisoners in some small islands between England and Ireland. It
was proposed to convey them thither, and to leave them to themselves, in
a state of complete seclusion; and a few light vessels were to be kept
constantly cruising about to guard them. To this plan it was, however,
objected that, in case of a descent on the part of the enemy, his grand
object would be to land on these islands, distribute arms among the
prisoners, and thus recruit an army immediately. Perhaps, added I, this
idea might have led to the use of hulks; for the prisoners were rapidly
increasing in numbers, and it was not thought safe to keep them on shore
among the people, as the latter betrayed a strong disposition to
fraternize with the French. “Well,” said Napoleon, “I can very readily
conceive that there might be good grounds for rejecting the plan you
have just mentioned. Safety and self-preservation before all things. But
the confinement in the hulks is a stain on the English character for
humanity, an irritating sting, that will never be removed from the
hearts of the French prisoners.”

“On the subject of prisoners of war,” continued Napoleon, “the English
Ministers invariably acted with their habitual bad faith, and with the
Machiavelism that distinguishes the school of the present day. Being
absolutely determined to avoid an exchange, which they did not wish to
incur the blame of having refused, they invented and multiplied
pretences beyond calculation. In the first place, that I should presume
to regard as prisoners, persons merely detained, was affirmed to be an
atrocious violation of the laws of civilized nations, and a principle
which the English Government would never avow, on any consideration
whatever. It happened that some of the individuals detained, who were at
large on parole, escaped, and were received triumphantly in England. On
the other hand, some Frenchmen effected their escape to France. I
expressed my disapprobation of their conduct, and proposed that the
individuals of either country, who had thus broken their parole, should
be mutually sent back again. But I received for answer that persons
detained were not to be accounted prisoners; that they had merely
availed themselves of the lawful privilege of escaping oppression; that
they had done right; and had been received accordingly. After this, I
thought myself justified in inducing the French to escape; and the
English Ministers filled their journals with the most insolent abuse,
declaring me to be a man who scrupled not to violate moral principle,
faith, and law.

“When, at length, they determined to treat for an exchange of prisoners,
or, perhaps, I ought rather to say, when they took it into their heads
to trifle with me on this point, they sent a Commissioner to France. All
the great difficulties were waved; and, with a fine parade of sentiment,
conditions were proposed for the sake of humanity, &c. They consented to
include persons detained in the list of prisoners, and to admit, under
that head, the Hanoverian troops, who were my prisoners, but who were at
large on parole. This latter point had been a standing obstacle;
because, it was insinuated the Hanoverians were not English. Thus far
matters had proceeded smoothly, and there was every probability of their
being brought to a conclusion. But I knew whom I had to deal with: and I
guessed the intentions that were really entertained. There were
infinitely more French prisoners in England than English prisoners in
France; and I was well aware that, the English being once safely landed
at home, some pretence would be found for breaking off the exchange, and
the rest of my poor Frenchmen might have remained on board the hulks to
all eternity. I declared that I would accede to no partial exchange;
that I would be satisfied only with a full and complete one; and, to
facilitate matters, I made the following proposal. I admitted that there
were fewer English prisoners in France than French prisoners in England;
but, I observed, that there were among my prisoners, Spaniards,
Portuguese, and other allies of the English, who had been taken under
their banners and fighting in the same cause. With this addition, I
could on my part produce a far more considerable number of prisoners
than there were in England. I therefore offered to surrender up all, in
return for all. This proposition, at first, occasioned some
embarrassment; it was discussed and rejected. However, as soon as they
had devised a scheme, by which they thought they could secure the object
they had in view, they acceded to my proposition. But I kept a watchful
eye on them: I knew that, if we began by merely exchanging Frenchmen for
Englishmen, as soon as the latter should be secured, pretences would be
found for breaking off the business, and the old evasions would be
resumed; for the English prisoners in France did not amount to one-third
of the French in England. To obviate any misunderstanding on either
side, I therefore proposed that we should exchange by convoys of only
three thousand at a time; that three thousand Frenchmen should be
returned to me, and that I would send back one thousand English, and two
thousand Hanoverians, Spaniards, Portuguese, and others. Thus, if any
misunderstanding arose and put a stop to the exchange, we should still
stand in the same relative proportions as before, and without having
practised any deception upon each other: but if, on the contrary, the
affair should proceed uninterruptedly to a conclusion, I promised to
surrender up, gratuitously, all the prisoners that might ultimately
remain in my hands. My conjectures respecting the real designs of the
English Government proved to be correct: these conditions, which were
really so reasonable, and the principle of which had already been
adopted, were rejected, and the whole business was broken off. Whether
the English Ministers really sympathized in the situation of their
countrymen, or whether they were convinced of my firm determination not
to be duped, I know not; but it would appear that they were at length
inclined to come to a conclusion, when I subsequently introduced the
subject by an indirect channel. However, our disasters in Russia at once
revived their hopes, and defeated my intentions.”

The Emperor next remarked upon the treatment of prisoners of war in
France, which, he said, was as generous and liberal as it possibly could
be; and he thought that, on this subject, no nation could justly
reproach us. “We have,” said he, “in our favour the testimony and the
sentiments of the prisoners themselves; for, with the exception of those
who were ardently attached to their local laws, or, in other words, to
notions of liberty (and these were exclusively the English and
Spaniards), all the rest, namely the Austrians, Prussians, and Russians,
were willing to remain with us: they left us with regret, and returned
to us with pleasure. This disposition on the part of the Spaniards and
English has oftener than once influenced the obstinacy of their efforts
or their resistance.”

The Emperor also made the following observation:—“It was my intention to
have introduced into Europe a change with respect to the treatment of
prisoners. I intended to enrol them in regiments, and to make them
labour, under military discipline, at public works and buildings. They
should have received whatever money they earned, and would thus have
been secured against the misery of absolute idleness and the disorders
arising out of it. They should have been well fed and clothed, and have
wanted for nothing, without being a burden to the state. All parties
would have been benefited by this plan. But my idea did not meet the
approval of the Council of State, which, in this instance, was swayed by
the mistaken philanthropy that leads to so many errors in the world. It
was said that it would be unjust and cruel to compel men to labour. It
was feared lest our enemies should make reprisals; and it was affirmed
that a prisoner was sufficiently unfortunate in the loss of his liberty,
without being placed under restraint as to the employment of his time.
But here was the abuse of which I complained, and which I wished to
correct. A prisoner, said I, must and should expect to be placed under
lawful constraint; and that which I would impose on him is for his own
advantage, as well as that of others. I do not require that he should be
subject to greater misery or fatigue, but to less danger, than he is
exposed to in his present condition. You are afraid lest the enemy
should make reprisals, and treat French prisoners in the same manner.
Heaven grant it should be so! I wish for nothing better! I should then
behold my sailors and soldiers occupied in wholesome labour, in the
fields or the public roads, instead of seeing them buried alive on board
those odious hulks. They would return home healthy, industrious and
inured to labour; and in every country they would leave behind them some
compensation for the fatal ravages of war. By way of concession, the
Council of State agreed to the organization of a few corps of prisoners
as voluntary labourers, or something of the sort; but this was by no
means the fulfilment of the scheme I had in view.”

NAPOLEON’S DESIGNS WITH REGARD TO ANTWERP.—HIS REFUSAL TO SURRENDER THAT
  CITY ONE OF THE CAUSES OF HIS FALL.—HIS GENEROUS SENTIMENTS IN
  REJECTING THE TREATY OF CHATILLON.—MARITIME WORKS.—OFFICIAL REPORT OF
  THE STATE OF THE EMPIRE IN 1813.—TOTAL AMOUNT OF EXPENDITURE IN PUBLIC
  WORKS, DURING THE REIGN OF NAPOLEON.

2d.—The Emperor did not leave his chamber to-day. When I waited on him,
I found him very unwell from the effects of cold; and the secretion of
saliva still continued.

I remained with him the greater part of the day. He sometimes
endeavoured to converse, and sometimes tried to sleep. He was very
restless, and often drew near the fire. He was evidently feverish.

In the course of the day, the conversation turned upon Antwerp; its
arsenal, its fortifications, its importance, and the great military and
political views he entertained with respect to that favourably situated
place.

He remarked that he had done much for Antwerp, but that this was little
in comparison with what he had proposed to do. He intended to have
rendered it a fatal point of attack to the enemy by sea, and by land to
have made it a certain resource, and a point of national security in
case of great disasters. He would have rendered Antwerp capable of
receiving a whole army in its defeat, and holding out against a close
siege for the space of a year, during which time, he said, a nation
would be enabled to rally in a mass for its deliverance, and to resume
the offensive. Five or six places of this kind were, he added, to
constitute the new system of defence, which he intended to have
established. The works, which had been completed in so short a time at
Antwerp, the numerous dock-yards, magazines, and canals, were already
the subject of admiration; but all this the Emperor declared to be
nothing. Antwerp was as yet, he said, merely a commercial town; the
military town was to be constructed on the opposite bank of the river.
For this purpose, ground had been purchased at a low rate, and it was to
have been sold again at a high profit for the purpose of building; so
that by this speculation, the expenses attending the enterprise would
have been considerably diminished. The winter docks would have been
capable of admitting three-deckers with all their guns on board; and
covered dry docks were to have been constructed for laying up vessels in
time of peace.

The Emperor remarked that the scheme he had formed would have rendered
Antwerp a stupendous and colossal bulwark; and that it would have been a
whole province in itself. Adverting to this superb establishment, he
observed, that it had been one of the causes of his exile to St. Helena;
that the demand for the cession of Antwerp was one of the circumstances
which led him to reject the conditions of peace proposed at Chatillon.
If the Allies had agreed to leave him in possession of Antwerp, he would
in all probability have concluded peace; and he questioned whether he
had not done wrong in refusing to sign the proposed ultimatum. “At that
period,” said he, “I had doubtless many resources and chances; but yet,
how much may be said in favour of the resolution I adopted! I did
right,” added he, “in refusing to sign the ultimatum, and I fully
explained my reasons for that refusal; therefore, even here, on this
rock, amidst all my misery, I have nothing to repent of. I am aware,
that few will understand me; but, in spite of the fatal turn of events,
even the common mass of mankind must now be convinced that duty and
honour left me no other alternative. If the Allies had thus far
succeeded in degrading me, would they have stopped there? Were their
offers of peace and reconciliation sincere? I knew them too well to put
faith in their professions. Would they not have availed themselves of
the immense advantages afforded them by the treaty, to finish by
intrigue what they had commenced by force of arms? Then where would have
been the safety, independence, and future welfare of France? Where would
have been my honour, my vows? Would not the Allies have ruined me in the
estimation of the people as effectually as they ruined me on the field
of battle? They would have found public opinion too ready to receive the
impression which it would have been their aim to give to it! How would
France have reproached me for suffering foreigners to parcel out the
territory that had been intrusted to my care! How many faults would have
been attributed to me by the unjust and the unfortunate! Could the
French people, full of the recollections of their glory, have patiently
endured the burdens that would inevitably have been imposed on them?
Hence would have arisen fresh commotions, anarchy, and desolation! I
preferred risking the last chances of battle, determining to abdicate in
case of necessity.”[1]

Footnote 1:

  These remarks of Napoleon are confirmed by the following:—

  _Letter from M. de Caulaincourt, to the Editor of the Constitutionel._
        (_Inserted in that Journal on the 21st of January 1820._)

  “SIR,—A work by M. Koch, entitled “_Campagne de 1814_,” contains
  several fragments of letters written by me to the Emperor and to the
  Prince of Neufchâtel, during the sitting of the Congress at Chatillon.

  “I think it incumbent on me to declare that this correspondence has
  been obtained and published without my knowledge. The high sources
  whence the author affirms he has derived his materials confers a
  degree of historical importance on his work; and therefore in so far
  as I am concerned, I cannot allow myself to sanction, by my silence,
  the errors it contains. Most of the details relative to the
  negotiations which took place subsequently to the 31st of March, are
  incorrect.

  “With regard to the Congress of Chatillon, if events have justified
  the desire I entertained for the establishment of peace, it would be
  wrong to withhold from France and history the motives of national
  interest and honour which prevented the Emperor from subscribing to
  the conditions which foreigners wished to impose on us.

  “I therefore fulfil the first of duties, that of acting justly and
  candidly, in developing these motives, by the following extract from
  the Emperor’s orders to me.

                                           “_Paris, January 19, 1814._

  “.... The point on which the Emperor most urgently insists is the
  necessity of France retaining her natural limits: this is my _sine qua
  non_. All the powers of Europe, even England, acknowledged these
  limits at Frankfort. France, if reduced to her old limits, would not
  now possess two thirds of the relative power which she had twenty
  years ago. The territory she has acquired in the direction of the
  Rhine does not balance what Russia, Prussia, and Austria have acquired
  merely by the dismemberment of Poland; all these states have increased
  in magnitude. To restore France to her old limits would be to humble
  and degrade her. France without the departments of the Rhine, without
  Belgium, Ostend, and Antwerp, would be nothing. The plan of limiting
  France to her old frontiers is inseparable from the restoration of the
  Bourbons; for they alone can offer a guarantee for the maintenance of
  such a system. England knows this; with any other government, peace on
  such a basis would be impossible, and could not endure. Neither the
  Emperor nor the Republic (should revolution again restore it), would
  ever subscribe to such a condition. As far as regards his Majesty, his
  determination is irrecoverably fixed: he will not leave France less
  than he found her. Should the Allies wish to alter the bases that have
  been proposed and accepted,—namely, that France should preserve her
  natural limits, the Emperor finds only three courses open to him: to
  fight and conquer; to fight and perish gloriously; or, finally, if the
  nation should not support him, to abdicate. The Emperor attaches but
  little importance to sovereignty; he will never purchase it by
  degradation.”

  “I hope. Sir, that your impartiality will induce you to grant this
  letter a place in your Journal, and I take this opportunity of
  presenting to you assurances of my respect,” &c.

                                                      “CAULAINCOURT,

                                                     Duke of Vicenza.”

I acknowledged the justice of the Emperor’s observations. He had lost
the throne, it is true, but voluntarily; and, because he chose rather to
renounce it than compromise our welfare and his own honour. History will
appreciate this sublime sacrifice. Power and life are transitory; but
glory endures and is immortal.

“But, after all,” said the Emperor, “the historian will, perhaps, find
it difficult to do me justice; the world is so overwhelmed with libels
and falsehoods, my actions have been so misrepresented, my character so
darkened and misunderstood.” To this, some one present replied that
doubt could exist only during his life; that injustice would be confined
solely to his contemporaries; that, as he had himself already remarked,
the clouds would disperse in proportion as his memory advanced in
posterity; that his character would rise daily and become the noblest
subject for the pen of history; and that, though the first catastrophe
might have proved fatal to his memory, owing to the outcry that was then
raised against him, yet the prodigies of his return, the acts of his
brief government, and his exile to St. Helena, now left him crowned with
glory in the eyes of nations and posterity. “That is very true,” replied
the Emperor, with an air of satisfaction, “and my fate may be said to be
the very opposite of others. A fall usually has the effect of lowering a
man’s character, but, on the contrary, my fall has elevated me
prodigiously. Every succeeding day divests me of some portion of my
_tyrant’s skin_.”

After a few moment’s silence, the conversation was resumed, on the
subject of Antwerp and the English expedition. “The English Government
and its General” said the Emperor, “seemed to vie with each other in
want of skill. If Lord Chatham, to whom our soldiers gave the nickname
of _Milord J’attends_, had resolved to make an energetic movement, he
might, doubtless, have destroyed our valuable establishment by a _coup
de main_, but, the first moment being lost, and our fleet having got in,
the place was secure. There was a great deal of exaggeration respecting
the efforts and measures taken for the safety of Antwerp. The zeal of
the citizens was excited only for secret and criminal designs.”

On mentioning some facts, of which I had been a witness, I happened to
observe that it was generally marshals who reviewed armies; but that
here the rule had been reversed, and armies reviewed their marshals,
three of whom had succeeded each other in a very short time. “Political
circumstances,” said the Emperor, “called for this change. I sent
Bessieres to Antwerp, because the crisis demanded a firm and
confidential man; but, as soon as the critical period was expired, I
sent another to succeed Bessieres, because I wished to have the latter
near me.”

The maritime works of Antwerp, notwithstanding their immense extent, are
but a small portion of those which were executed by Napoleon. Having
been attached, as a member of the Council of State, to the department of
the marine, I possess, _ex officio_, an account of these works, a list
of which I will here insert, in geographical order, proceeding from
South to North.

1. Fort Boyard, constructed for the purpose of enlarging and defending
the anchorage of the Isle of Aix, whence, by dint of perseverance and
intrepidity, a passage had been discovered out of sight of the enemy,
between Oleron and the main-land, by which even ships of the line could
reach the anchoring grounds of the Gironde and its outlets.

2. The extensive and superb works of Cherbourg. The dike, which was
commenced under Louis XVI., and which had suffered considerable injury
during the Revolution, was repaired; the central part being elevated
nine feet above the highest level of the sea, and along an extent of 100
toises, for the purpose of mounting a battery of twenty guns of the
largest calibre. This work was executed in less than two years, from
1802 to 1804, and with such success that, though it has been neglected
since 1813, it has suffered no decay, and still retains all its original
strength.

A large elliptical tower of granite was built in the centre, and within
the dike, which it supports, and by which, it is, in its turn, covered.
The massive foundations of this tower, which, being constructed in the
open sea, of course presented enormous difficulties, were completed at
the end of 1812, and raised to the height of six feet above the level of
the highest tides. The solidity which it has preserved since that
period, though in a state of neglect, and exposed to the violent action
of the waves, is a manifest proof of the strength of the defensive works
that were projected on this artificial rock, when the time should arrive
for the full completion of the plan. This plan consisted in raising, at
the height of one story, a barrack, capable of containing the garrison,
a powder magazine, reservoir, &c.; this was to be surmounted by an
arched platform, bomb-proof, and capable of receiving a casemated
battery of nineteen thirty-six pounders, and above this was to be a
second platform, capable of receiving mounted guns, if necessary; the
whole crowning the central battery, already existing on the dike itself.
Thus the enemy’s attack would have been resisted by four ranges of
batteries one above another.

In less than eight years, a military port was excavated in the solid
rock. It was capable of containing forty-five ships of the line, a
proportionate number of frigates, three slips for building, &c. This
asylum, so necessary for ships of the line, owing to the natural
situation of the roads of Cherbourg, which are too much exposed to the
violence of the waves, was dug thirty feet beneath the level of the sea,
at the lowest ebb tide, in order to afford, at all times, a secure
station for the largest ships. When it was opened in 1813, the moles and
dikes were fully completed along its whole extent. At that time, the
Empress Maria Louisa and all her Court witnessed the magnificent and
sublime spectacle of the sudden irruption of the sea, which was
admitted, simply by the spontaneous rupture of the immense dam that had
hitherto repelled its efforts. The largest vessels immediately entered
the enclosure, which has since afforded a convenient station for
shipping, together with the requisite accommodations for building,
repairing, and fitting out: in short, it possesses every advantage that
might be expected in so important a creation of art, and is justly
considered to be one of the noblest monuments of Napoleon’s reign.
According to the Emperor’s plan, this stupendous work was intended only
as a first or outward port; he had determined on constructing, in a
lateral direction, at a little distance within it, a second or inner
port, which was to be commenced immediately, and which would have been
speedily completed, owing to the precautions that were previously
adopted. It was to be large enough to receive twenty-five ships of the
line, and behind these two ports, and extending along their whole
length, in a semicircular form, there were to be built thirty covered
docks, where the same number of ships of the line might be kept in
constant readiness to put to sea. Such were the immense works executed
or planned at Cherbourg alone.

3. The numerous works occasioned by the flotilla for the invasion of
England.—It was necessary to provide anchorages, to render the
preparations simultaneous, and to execute every offensive and defensive
operation. All this required, at various points, the construction of
forts of stone and wood, quays, basins, jetties, dams, sluices, &c.

Boulogne was chosen as the central point of assemblage; and Vimereux,
Ambleteuse, and Etaples, were the secondary points. Boulogne itself was
rendered capable of receiving 2,000 ships of different kinds. Besides
its natural port, an artificial basin was formed, by means of a dam,
closed in the middle by a sluice, twenty-four feet wide. This basin was
capable of containing 8 or 900 ships afloat, and in a constant state of
readiness; and the sluice, from the preceding retention, had the
advantage of producing currents of water, which increased the depth of
the real port, and cleared its entrance of sand-banks, by which it was
liable to be obstructed. Vimereux, Etaples, and Ambleteuse, were
simultaneously rendered capable of receiving a proportionate number of
ships: all these undertakings were completed in the space of two years.

4. Important local repairs and improvements in all the ports of the
coast.—Havre was rendered accessible to frigates, by destroying, by
means of a strong sluice, the banks of gravel that obstructed its
entrance. Improvements were made at St. Valery, Dieppe, Calais,
Gravelines, and Dunkirk; the port of the latter was cleared, and the
marsh that covered the town was drained. A second flotilla was to be
assembled at Ostend, to which a free entrance had been effected by
clearing its channel.

5. The works of Flushing.—This town having momentarily fallen into the
hands of the English, they destroyed all its military establishments
when they evacuated it. The Emperor ordered the re-construction of the
works on a much more extensive scale than before. Fully appreciating the
important geographical situation of the place, he ordered the basin to
be re-dug and enlarged, as well as its entrance. The channel was also to
be deepened, so that the basin might be rendered capable of admitting
even eighty-gun ships, and affording a winter station for a squadron of
twenty ships, always ready to put to sea in one or two tides. This
advantage was to be procured by means of a very ingenious plan,
suggested by the naval Commandant of the place, and which consisted
simply in confining the water at high tide, in the ditches of the town.
The basin was a most important acquisition, as it afforded the means of
making naval preparations, free from all the inconveniences of the
Scheldt. Our ships would have been enabled to sail directly to the coast
of England; and the English would thus have been compelled to keep
cruisers constantly on the watch; whereas, hitherto, as soon as they
knew that our ships were disarmed in Flushing, or had returned to
Antwerp, on the approach of winter, they quietly went into port, having
nothing to apprehend until the return of spring. But it was necessary to
render the fortifications of Flushing equal to the protection of a whole
squadron: consequently, defensive works were multiplied on various
points; magazines and other establishments were re-constructed; and
orders were issued for rendering them bomb-proof, and surmounting them
with batteries. Flushing would have been thickly planted with cannon on
all points, and would, in short, have been rendered impregnable.

6. Works commenced at Terneuse.—The importance of the western mouth of
the Scheldt, for enabling our fleet to sail in and out, and the
inconveniences attending the return of our ships to Antwerp, every year
during the winter season, suggested to the Emperor the idea of forming a
still greater arsenal than Flushing near the mouth of the river.
Terneuse, on the left bank of the Scheldt, three leagues from the mouth
of the river, was the point fixed on, and the works were immediately
commenced. They were, however, suspended, on account of the great length
of time, as well as the enormous expense, that would have been requisite
for their completion.

7. The immense works at Antwerp.—This town, which is nearly twenty
leagues distant from the sea, from which it is separated by a winding
and very difficult channel, seemed to be destitute of every desirable
advantage for the formation of a maritime arsenal; and it had hitherto
presented only petty commercial establishments. A fleet built at Antwerp
would, with difficulty, have been able to descend the river, and would
have been but ill defended against the inclemencies of the weather, or
the attempts of the enemy. It would have been useless during one third
of the year; for the approach of winter forced the ships to come higher
up, to avoid the current and ice of the river; there being no wet docks.
But these numerous difficulties seemed as nothing in the eyes of
Napoleon. In his impatience to make the English feel the dangers of the
Scheldt, which they had themselves so frequently acknowledged to be
formidable, he speedily concerted his plans, and, in less than eight
years, Antwerp assumed the aspect of an important maritime arsenal, and
a considerable fleet was already riding in the Scheldt. Every thing was
done thoroughly and completely. Magazines, quays, dock-yards, &c. were
newly constructed. A provisional asylum was found for the shipping
against the ice of the river, at Rupel, while two great wet docks were
dug in the town of Antwerp, capable of receiving vessels of all sizes
with all their guns on board. Twenty slips for building were raised all
in a line, as if by enchantment, and twenty vessels, lying in these
slips at once, presented to the traveller, arriving by the Tête de
Flandres, the imposing and singular spectacle of twenty vessels of the
line ranged as a squadron. Most of these works, however, Napoleon
regarded merely as a temporary provision borrowed from commerce. He
intended to establish a complete and much larger arsenal facing Antwerp,
on the bank of the river, opposite to the Tête de Flandres. He at first
conceived the bold design of throwing a bridge across the Scheldt; but
he at length determined in favour of flying-bridges, of a very ingenious
construction. The Emperor, as I have already observed, had formed the
grandest ideas respecting the improvements at Antwerp, and the details
of his plan extended as far as the sea. He used to say that he intended
to make Antwerp a province, a little kingdom, in itself. To this object
he devoted himself with that degree of interest which he might be
expected to evince in the execution of one of his most favourite
projects. He made several journeys to Antwerp, for the purpose of
personally inspecting the works in their most trivial details.

On one of these occasions, he happened to fall in with a Captain or
Lieutenant-Colonel of Engineers, who was modestly assisting in the
fortifications of the place, and with whom he entered into the
discussion of certain points connected with the business in which he was
engaged. Shortly afterwards, the officer unexpectedly received a letter,
informing him that he was appointed Aide-de-camp to the Emperor, and
directing him to repair to the Tuileries to enter upon his duties. The
poor officer was filled with astonishment: he thought that he was
dreaming, or, that the letter had been misdirected. He was so extremely
diffident, and possessed so little knowledge of the world, that this
announcement of his promotion threw him into great perplexity. He
recollected having once seen me at Antwerp, and he begged I would render
him my assistance. Accordingly, on his arrival in Paris, he came and
assured me of his total ignorance of Court manners, and the
embarrassment he felt in presenting himself to the Emperor. However, I
soon succeeded in encouraging him; and, before he reached the gate of
the palace, he had mustered a tolerable degree of confidence. This
officer was General Bernard, whose great talents were brought into
notice by this circumstance, and who, at the time of our disasters,
proceeded to America, where he was placed at the head of the military
works of the United States.

Napoleon loved to take people thus by surprise. Whenever he discovered
talent, he never failed to raise it to its proper sphere, without
suffering himself to be swayed by any secondary considerations. This was
one of his striking characteristics.

8. The works in Holland.—No sooner had Holland fallen into the hands of
Napoleon, than his creative ardour was immediately directed to all the
different branches of her political economy. He repaired and enlarged
the arsenals of the Meuse, Rotterdam, and Helvoetsluys. Hitherto ships
of the line could not get up to Amsterdam, and could not get out from it
without vast expense and labour; it being necessary to drag them on
_camels_, unladen and without guns, to the opening of the Zuyderzee.
This operation did not suit the rapidity necessary in the great
enterprises of the period; and the Emperor determined to remove the
northern arsenal to a situation in which it would be exempt from these
disadvantages. He accordingly gave orders for the establishment or
improvement of the Nievendip, where, in a short time, twenty-five ships
of the line were provided with a safe winter station, and laid up beside
magnificent quays. This important point was defended by the military
establishments of the Helder, which formed the key of Holland.
Napoleon’s plan was to make the Nievendip the Antwerp of the Zuyderzee.

9. Works of the Weser, the Ems, and the Elbe.—When Napoleon joined
Bremen, Hamburg, and Lubeck, to the Empire, his plans and works extended
with his dominion. He took measures for rendering the Elbe accessible to
ships of the line, and projected a maritime arsenal at Delfzyl at the
mouth of the Ems. But the object which particularly engrossed the
attention of Napoleon was the cutting of a line of canals which, with
the help of the Ems, the Weser, and the Elbe, would have effected a
junction between Holland and the Baltic. We should thus have been
enabled to communicate safely, and by a simple system of inland
navigation, from Bordeaux and the Mediterranean, with the Powers of the
North. We should easily have obtained from them all kinds of naval
productions for our ports, and we should have been able to send out
against them, when we chose, our flotillas from the Channel, Holland,
&c.

All these important works were planned, and most of them executed, with
amazing rapidity. The creative genius of Napoleon conceived them, and
Decrès, the minister, indefatigably prosecuted the designs that were
suggested. The plans were drawn, and the works executed by Prosny,
Sganzin, Cachin, and others. The names attached to such monuments are
imperishable!

If, to what has here been described, be added other simultaneous
prodigies in every other branch of the public service, and in every
other part of the territory; and if it be considered that all were
executed amidst perpetual war, and without more, perhaps even with less
burdens, than now, after a long peace, weigh on the countries that
composed the vast French Empire, it is impossible to repress
astonishment and admiration. All these miracles were effected by
steadiness of determination, talent armed with power, and finances
wisely and economically applied! Certainly, if, in addition to what has
already been mentioned, the mass of fortifications, the multitude of
public roads, bridges, canals, and edifices of various kinds, be taken
into account, it must be acknowledged that no sovereign in the world
ever did so much in so short a time, and by imposing so few burdens on
his people.

Italy, of which Napoleon was king, also enjoyed her share of his
magnificent improvements. He cut fine roads across the Alps and the
Apennines; established a maritime arsenal at Genoa; fortified Corfu, so
as to make that island the key of Greece; repaired and enlarged the port
of Venice; and, while the works were proceeding, it was rendered capable
of admitting French ships of the line, by means of the _camels_ used in
Holland. To obviate the risk of the ship being attacked by the enemy,
during this hazardous conveyance, a plan was proposed by which they were
to be enabled to carry their own guns; and it was, I believe,
successfully adopted. Napoleon, moreover, intended to establish a naval
arsenal at Ragusa, another at Pola, in Istria, and a third at Ancona. He
conceived the happy and bold idea of forming a junction between the
gulfs of Venice and Genoa, by the help of the Po, and a canal extending
from Alessandria to Savona, through the Apennines. This plan would have
been attended with the most important results; for, independently of its
immense commercial and military advantages, it would have established a
direct and safe communication between Venice and Toulon; and the latter
port would thus have received all the naval productions of the Adriatic
free from any chance of their being attacked by the enemy. Finally,
Napoleon cleared Rome of the rubbish with which it was encumbered,
restored many ancient vestiges of the Romans, and formed the design of
draining the Pontine marshes, &c.

I here subjoin the preamble of the Report on the state of the Empire,
presented to the Legislative Body, in the sitting of the 25th of
February, 1813, by Count Montalivet, Minister of the Interior. This
superb Report, which is founded in all its points on authentic
documents, is calculated to afford a just idea of the wonders of
Napoleon’s government. I think I may properly close the present subject,
by inserting an official statement of the expenses in public works,
during the memorable reign of the Emperor.

“GENTLEMEN,—His Majesty has directed me to make you acquainted with the
situations of the Interior of the Empire, during the years 1811 and
1812.

“You will have the satisfaction to observe that, notwithstanding the
great armies which a state of war, both maritime and continental, has
rendered indispensably necessary, the population has continued to
increase; that French industry has made new progress; that the soil was
never better cultivated, nor our manufactures more flourishing; and that
at no period of our history has wealth been more equally diffused among
all classes of society.

“The farmer now enjoys benefits to which he was formerly a stranger. He
is enabled to purchase such land as suits him at the highest price; his
food and clothing are better, and more abundant than before; and his
dwelling is more substantial and convenient.

“Improvements in agriculture, manufactures, and the useful arts, are no
longer rejected merely because they are new. Experiments are made in
every branch of labour, and the methods that prove to be most
advantageous are substituted for old ones. Artificial meadows are
multiplied; the system of fallows is abandoned; the succession of crops
is better understood, and improved plans of cultivation augment the
produce of the soil. Cattle are multiplied, and the different breeds
improved. The very labourer finds means to purchase, at a high price,
Spanish rams and stallions of the finest breed. They are now
sufficiently enlightened to know their real interests, and they do not
scruple to make these valuable purchases. Thus the demands of our
manufacturers, our agriculturists, and our armies, are every day better
supplied.

“This high degree of prosperity is to be attributed to the liberal laws
by which this great Empire is ruled, to the suppression of feudalism,
tithes, mortmains, and monastic orders; measures which have created or
set at liberty numerous private estates, which are now the free
patrimony of a multitude of families, formerly mere paupers. It is also
to be ascribed to the more equal division of wealth, to the clearness
and simplification of the laws relative to landed property and
mortgages, and to the promptitude observed in the decision of law-suits,
which are now daily decreasing in number. To these same causes, and to
the influence of vaccination, must be attributed the increase of the
population. It may even be said that the conscription, which annually
enrols under our banner the flower of the French youth, has had some
share in contributing to this increase, by multiplying the number of
marriages; because marriage fixes for ever the fate of the young
Frenchman, who has once served in obedience to the law.”

_Official statement of the expenditure in public works, from Napoleon’s
  accession to the imperial throne; presented, together with the
  vouchers, to the Legislative Body, by the Minister of the Interior._

                                                            _Francs._

   Imperial palaces and buildings, belonging to the        62,000,000
     crown.

   Fortifications                                         144,000,000

   Sea Ports                                              117,000,000

   Roads, highways, &c.                                   277,000,000

   Bridges in Paris and the departments                    31,000,000

   Canals, navigation and draining                        123,000,000

   Works in Paris                                         102,000,000

   Public buildings of the departments and great          149,000,000
     towns

                                                            —-—-—-—-—

                                                Total   1,005,000,000

                                                            —-—-—-—-—

             THE EMPEROR INDISPOSED AND MELANCHOLY.—AMUSING
                 ANECDOTES.—TWO AIDES-DE-CAMP.—MALLET’S
                                 PLOT.

3rd.—The Emperor still continued to seclude himself like a hermit.
Towards evening he sent for me:—he informed me that he was somewhat
relieved of his tooth-ache, though he was not better in other respects.
He said that he felt extremely weak and depressed in spirits, and that,
during the whole day, his mind had been possessed with gloomy ideas. He
was taking the bath, and, after a few moments’ silence, he said, as if
making an effort to rouse himself, “Come, _my Dinarzade_, if you are not
too drowsy, tell me one of your stories. It is long since you have told
me any thing about your friends of the Faubourg St. Germain.”—“Sire,” I
replied, “I have related so much on that subject that I fancy I have
exhausted my whole stock of tales, whether true or false. Only the
scandalous stories now remain untold, and in these your Majesty knows
that you yourself were never spared. However, a droll anecdote just now
occurs to me. One day, M. de T—— on leaving home to attend to his
ministerial duties, informed his wife that he should bring back M. Denon
with him to dinner. He wished the distinguished traveller to be treated
with the utmost attention; and he told Madame de T—— that the best thing
she could do would be to look over his work, so that she might be
enabled to pay some handsome compliments to the author; at the same time
informing her in what particular part of the library the book was to be
found. Madame de T—— set about her task—she found the book exceedingly
interesting, and was delighted at the thought of speedily being
introduced to the hero. No sooner were the company seated at table, than
she informed M. Denon, whom she had taken care to place beside her, that
she had been reading his work, and that she had been very much pleased
with it. M. Denon bowed, and the lady proceeded to remark on the
singular countries he had visited, and the hardships he had endured, at
the same time taking pains to assure him how deeply she sympathized in
his troubles. M. Denon bowed again; and all went on very smoothly until
Madame de T—— still addressing herself to M. Denon, declared how very
much delighted she had been when his faithful _Friday_ came to share his
solitude. “Have you him still,” she asked. On hearing this, M. Denon
started, and, turning to the person who sat on his other hand, he said:
Is it possible that she can take me for Robinson Crusoe? The fact is, or
I should more properly say, as the story goes, poor Madame de T—— had
been reading the Adventures of Robinson Crusoe, instead of Denon’s
Travels in Egypt.” The Emperor laughed heartily, and afterwards several
times related the anecdote himself.

The conversation turned on the inventive malignity of Parisian society,
and the fine story that was got up about the cabinet-maker, who
awkwardly discovered to B—— the concealed drawer of a bureau, which
happened to contain many secrets connected with his own family: the
violent anger of B—— against _Ventre de Biche_, the sympathy expressed
for him by Madame de V——, and the singular consolation she afforded
him,—all were described. The Emperor was much amused by these details,
most of which were new to him, and he expressed his belief that the
story was not entirely an invention. He once more repeated his censure
of the saloons of Paris, which, he said, might truly be styled the
infernal regions. He observed that they kept up a constant system of
slander and calumny, and that, therefore, they might with justice have
engaged the constant attention of all the tribunals of correctional
police in the capital.

The Emperor had now become animated, and he conversed for a considerable
time. He happened to mention an officer whom, he said, he had not
treated very well; and I ventured to observe that I believed he had,
notwithstanding, been Aide-de-camp to a distinguished General. “What
signifies that?” resumed the Emperor. “Don’t you know,” continued he,
smiling, “that a general frequently has two aides-de-camp: one for the
field and one for the household?”

He said a great deal respecting the national inaptitude of the French to
close a revolution, or to adhere to any fixed order of things; and he
alluded to the celebrated affair of Mallet, which he jokingly said might
be called a miniature or a caricature of his own return from the Isle of
Elba. “Mallet’s absurd plot,” said he, “might have been truly regarded
as a hoax. A prisoner of state, an obscure individual, effected his own
liberation, and, in his turn, imprisoned the Prefect and even the
Minister of Police, those keepers of dungeons and detectors of plots,
who suffered themselves to be caught in the snare like so many sheep. A
Prefect of Paris, the born sponsor of his department, and moreover a
very devoted subject, readily lent himself to every plan for assembling
a government that had no existence. Ministers, appointed by the
conspirators, were engaged in making their round of visits, when those
who nominated them were again safely lodged in prison. Finally, the
inhabitants of the capital learned in the morning the sort of political
debauch that had taken place during the night, without having been in
the least disturbed by it. Such an extravagant attempt,” said the
Emperor, “could never have produced any result. Even had it succeeded,
it must have fallen, of itself, in the space of a few hours; and the
victorious conspirators would have thought only of hiding themselves
amidst their success. I was, therefore, far less incensed at the attempt
of the criminal than at the facility with which those who appeared most
attached to me had been prevailed on to become his accomplices. On my
arrival, each candidly related to me the details that concerned himself,
and which served to criminate all! they frankly avowed that they had
been caught, and had, for a moment, placed full faith in my overthrow.
They did not deny that, in the delirium of the moment, they had entered
into the designs of the conspirators; and they rejoiced with me at their
happy escape. Not one of them mentioned the slightest resistance, or the
least effort made to defend and perpetuate the existing government. This
seemed never to have entered their heads: so accustomed were they to
changes and revolutions, that all were perfectly resigned to the
establishment of a new order of things. All therefore changed
countenance, and manifested the utmost embarrassment; when, in a
resolute tone of voice, I said, ‘Well, Gentlemen, it appears you thought
my reign at an end; to that I have nothing to say. But where were your
oaths to the King of Rome? What became of your principles and doctrines?
You make me tremble for the future.’ I found it necessary to make an
example, were it only for the sake of putting weak men on their guard
for the future; and judgment fell upon poor Frochot, the Prefect of
Police, who, I am sure, was attached to me. Yet, at the mere request of
one of these mountebank conspirators, instead of making the resistance
which his duty required; instead of manifesting a firm determination to
perish at his post rather than yield; he very contentedly issued orders
for preparing a place for the sitting of the new Government!—Indeed,”
said the Emperor, “the readiness with which the French people
accommodate themselves to change is calculated to prolong vicissitudes,
which no other nation but themselves could endure. Thus, individuals of
every party seem to be convinced that all is not yet settled; and Europe
shares this opinion, which is founded not less on our natural
inconstancy and volatility than on the mass of events that have occurred
during the last thirty years.”

THE EMPERORS’S CONTINUED INDISPOSITION AND CONFINEMENT.—HE OBSERVES THAT
  HE OUGHT TO HAVE DIED AT MOSCOW OR WATERLOO.—EULOGIUM ON HIS FAMILY.

4th.—To-day, the Emperor would not receive any one during the whole of
the morning. He sent for me at the hour he had appointed for taking the
bath, during which, and for some time afterwards, he conversed on the
knowledge of the ancients, the historians by whom it has been
transmitted to modern times, the connecting links formed by different
writers, &c. His reflections on this subject all led to the conclusion
that the world is yet in its infancy, and human nature still more so. We
then took a view of the structure of the globe, the irregularities of
its surface, the unequal division of sea and land, the amount of its
population, the scale by which that population was dispersed, the
different political societies into which it was formed, &c. I calculated
that Europe contained 170,000,000 inhabitants. The Emperor remarked that
he himself had governed 80,000,000; and, I added that, after the
alliance with Prussia and Austria, he had been at the head of more than
100,000,000. The Emperor then suddenly changed the conversation. He
asked for my Atlas, and while he looked over it, he several times
remarked that it was a truly invaluable work for youth.

Afterwards, when speaking of the wonders of his life and the
vicissitudes of his fortune, the Emperor remarked that he ought to have
died at Moscow; because, at that time, his military glory had
experienced no reverse; and his political career was unexampled in the
history of the world. He then drew one of those rapid and animating
pictures, which he sketches off with so much facility, and which
frequently rise to a degree of sublimity. Observing that the countenance
of one of the persons, who happened to be present, was not exactly
expressive of approbation, he said, “This is not your opinion? You do
not think I ought to have closed my career at Moscow?”—“No, Sire,” was
the reply; “for, in that case, history would have been deprived of the
return from Elba, of the most generous and most heroic act that ever man
performed; of the grandest and most sublime event that the world ever
witnessed.”—“Well,” returned the Emperor, “there may be some truth in
that; but, what say you to Waterloo? Ought I not to have perished
there?”—“Sire,” said the person whom he addressed, “if I have obtained
pardon for Moscow, I do not see why I should not ask it for Waterloo
also. The future is beyond the will and the power of man; it is in the
hands of God alone.”

At another time, the Emperor spoke of the different members of his
family, the little assistance he had received from them, the many
embarrassments they had occasioned him, &c. He particularly alluded to
the mistaken notion they had conceived, that, being once placed at the
head of a people, they should become identified with them, so as to
prefer their interests to those of the common country. This idea, he
said, might have originated in honourable feeling; but it was most
erroneous and mischievous in its application. In their mistaken notions
of independence, the members of his family sometimes seemed to consider
their power as detached, forgetting that they were merely parts of a
great whole, whose views and interests they should have aided instead of
opposed. “But, after all,” continued he, “they were very young and
inexperienced, and were surrounded by snares, flatterers, and
intriguers, with secret and evil designs.” Then, passing suddenly from
their faults to their good qualities, he added, “And yet, if we judge
from analogy, what family, in similar circumstances, would have acted
better? Every one is not qualified to be a statesman: that requires a
combination of powers which does not often fall to the lot of one. In
this respect, all my brothers were singularly situated; they possessed
at once too much and too little talent. They felt themselves too strong
to resign themselves blindly to a guiding counsellor, and yet too weak
to be left entirely to themselves. But, take them all in all, I have
certainly good reason to be proud of my family.

“Joseph would have been an ornament to society in any country; and
Lucien would have been an honour to any political assembly. Jerome, as
he advanced in life, would have developed every qualification requisite
in a sovereign. Louis would have been distinguished in any rank or
condition of life. My sister Eliza was endowed with masculine powers of
mind: she must have proved herself a philosopher in her adverse fortune.
Caroline possesses great talents and capacity. Pauline, perhaps the most
beautiful woman of her age, has been, and will continue to the end of
her life, the most amiable creature in the world. As to my mother, she
deserves all kind of veneration. How seldom is so numerous a family
entitled to so much praise! Add to this, that, setting aside the jarring
of political opinions, we sincerely loved each other. For my part, I
never ceased to cherish fraternal affection for them all; and I am
convinced that in their hearts they felt the same sentiments towards me,
and that, in case of need, they would have given me every proof of it.”

After dinner, the Emperor received all his suite, and we remained with
him for upwards of an hour. He was in bed; but he conversed with
facility, and was evidently better. We took leave of him with the hope
of soon seeing him recovered. We remarked that he had not dined with us
for the space of twelve days; and that without him our lives, our hours,
our moments were deranged and devoid of interest.

GEOGRAPHY THE PASSION OF THE MOMENT.—STATE BED ARRIVED FROM LONDON.—THE
  EMPEROR CALLS IT A RAT-TRAP.—ANECDOTES RELATED BY THE ENGLISH.—LETTERS
  FROM ST. HELENA, &C.

5th.—The Emperor continued confined to his room. He sent for me, as he
had done for several days past, at the hour appointed for taking his
bath. He was somewhat relieved from the soreness in his mouth; but his
teeth were still very tender. He resumed the conversation of the
preceding day, on the structure of the globe, &c., for the Emperor now
evinced an absolute passion for geography. He took my map of the world,
and remarked on the irregular distribution of land and sea. He paused
for a time on the vast table-land of Asia; and from the immense Pacific
Ocean he passed to the more contracted space of the Atlantic. He started
many questions relative to the variable and the trade winds, the
monsoons of the Indian Ocean, the calm of the Pacific, the hurricanes of
the West Indies, &c.; and he found at the respective places, on the map,
the physical and speculative solutions which science furnishes on these
subjects. This pleased him exceedingly, and he continued his perusal of
the map, making remarks as he went over it: “Tables,” said he, “are of
the highest use in assisting the mind to draw comparisons: they awaken
and excite ideas. You have fallen on an excellent plan, in thus making
your tables of history and geography embrace all the remarkable
circumstances and phenomena connected with these sciences. I am every
day better and better pleased with your book.”[2]

Footnote 2:

  I had but one copy of it at St. Helena, and this was constantly in his
  bed-room. If I happened to fetch it for reference, or to make
  corrections, it was asked for again almost immediately. At the moment
  of my departure, Count Bertrand begged me to leave it him, for the
  instruction of his children. He has since told me that he could never
  use it. The Emperor took entire possession of it, and when in his last
  moments, he pointed out the books which were to be selected from his
  private library for his Son, the Atlas was among them. If I could not
  refrain from mentioning such a signal mark of approbation, I hope I
  shall be forgiven.

The Emperor wished to refer to some of the oldest books of travels; and
the works of the monk Rubruquis, and the Italian Marco Polo were brought
to him. He glanced over them, and remarked that they contained no
information, and possessed no other merit than their old age.

On leaving the bath, he went to his bed-chamber, to see the grand bed
that had been sent to him from London, and which had just been put up.
It was surmounted by a sort of canopy, supported on four large posts, so
high that it was found necessary to cut them at the foot, before it
could be put up in the Emperor’s little bed-chamber, which it almost
filled. Besides, it had, from some cause or other, a very disagreeable
smell, and was altogether so bulky and unsteady that it suggested the
idea of a tottering castle. The Emperor said it was an absolute
rat-trap; but, that he would take care not to be caught in it. He
ordered it to be removed immediately; remarking, that he did not wish to
be troubled with such lumber. It was accordingly taken down, and the old
camp-bed was substituted in its place. The confusion and inconvenience
occasioned by these changes put the Emperor very much out of humour.

In the course of the day, I had a long conversation with an English
seaman, an enthusiastic admirer of the Emperor, who related to me
several anecdotes, which pleased me the more as they were entirely new
to me. But though not generally known, they are not the less true; for
some of the facts the narrator had obtained from unquestionable
authority, and to others he had himself been a witness. When I
afterwards mentioned some of these particulars to the Emperor, he
immediately recollected them and acknowledged their correctness.
However, my informant assured me that, to his great astonishment, these
anecdotes had been but little circulated in England; and that there, as
well as in France, whatever reflected honour on Napoleon, or showed his
character in an advantageous light, was lost by that fatality to which I
have so often alluded: for calumny and falsehood constantly overwhelmed
all that was good beneath the mass of evil that was invented. The
following are some of the anecdotes, to which I have just now alluded.

“We were treated,” said my narrator, “in the best manner possible. At
Verdun, the depôt of the English prisoners of war, we enjoyed the same
privileges as the inhabitants. Verdun is a very pleasant town, and we
found provisions and wine exceedingly cheap. We were allowed to walk
several miles beyond the town, without the trouble of asking permission;
and we could, if we pleased, obtain leave to absent ourselves for
several days at a time. In short, we were so well protected against all
sorts of vexations, that the General, under whose command we were
placed, having been guilty of some irregularities in his treatment of
us, was ordered to Paris, by the special command of Napoleon, and from
fear of the punishment that awaited him, he committed suicide. It once
happened that we received orders to confine ourselves to our lodgings,
and we were informed that we should not be allowed to quit them for
several days; the reason assigned for this measure was that the Emperor
intended to pass through Verdun, and that it was not thought safe to
allow him to be surrounded by so many of the enemy’s prisoners. Besides
the disappointment of our curiosity (for we very much wished to see
Napoleon), this order hurt us exceedingly. Do they distrust brave
English seamen? we thought. Is it possible that they confound us with
assassins? Be this as it might, we were doomed to be close prisoners;
when, on the day of Napoleon’s arrival, we were, to our surprise,
informed that we were again at liberty, and that the Emperor very much
disapproved of the order that had been given for our confinement. We
eagerly thronged to see the Emperor, and he passed us unattended by any
escort, with an air of perfect security, and even with an expression of
kindness, which quite delighted us. Our acclamations were not less
sincere than those of the French themselves.

“Napoleon and Maria Louisa, returning from their journey in Holland,
arrived at Givet on the Meuse, where several hundred English prisoners
were at that time collected. A sudden storm arose; there was a heavy
fall of rain, the river overflowed its banks, and the pontoon bridge was
broken and rendered impassable. However, the Emperor, anxious to
continue his journey, and not being in the habit of thinking any thing
impossible, resolved to cross the river at all hazards. All the boatmen
in the neighbourhood were collected together; but not one would attempt
to cross. ‘However,’ said Napoleon, ‘I am determined to be on the other
side of the river before noon.’ He immediately ordered some of the
principal English prisoners to be brought to him: ‘Are there many of you
here?’ said he, ‘and are there any sailors among you?’ ‘There are 500 of
us, and we are all seamen,’ was the reply. ‘Well, I want to know whether
you think it possible to cross the river, and whether you will undertake
to convey me to the opposite bank.’ It was acknowledged to be a
hazardous attempt, but some of our veterans undertook to accomplish it.
Napoleon got into the boat with a degree of confidence that surprised
us, and he reached the opposite bank in safety. He heartily thanked
those who had rendered him this service, and ordered that they should be
supplied with new clothes. To this he added a pecuniary present, and
granted them their liberty.

“A young English sailor, seized with an ardent longing to return to his
country, escaped from a depôt, and succeeded in making his way to the
coast, in the neighbourhood of Boulogne, where he concealed himself in
the woods. His eager desire to return home suggested to him the idea of
making a little boat, to enable him to reach some of the English
cruisers, which he spent the greater part of the day in watching, from
the tops of the trees on the shore. He was seized just at the moment
when he was about to put to sea with his little boat, and to make a
desperate attempt to secure his liberty. He was imprisoned on suspicion
of being a spy or a robber. This circumstance reached the ears of
Napoleon, who was then at Boulogne, and he felt a curiosity to see the
boat, of which he heard so much. When it was shown to him, he could not
bring himself to believe that any rational being would have ventured to
put to sea in it. He ordered the sailor to be brought to him, and the
young man declared that he had really intended to escape, with the aid
of his boat, and the only favour he asked was permission to execute his
project. ‘You appear very eager to return to England,’ said the Emperor;
‘Perhaps you have left a sweetheart behind you?’ ‘No,’ replied the young
man, ‘but I have a mother, at home, who is old and infirm, and I am
anxious to return to her.’—‘Well, you shall return,’ said Napoleon; and
he immediately ordered that the young man should be provided with new
clothes, and sent on board the first English cruiser that might appear
in sight. He also directed that he should be furnished with a sum of
money, as a present to his mother, remarking that she must be a good
mother, to have so good a son.”[3]

Footnote 3:

  Since my return to Europe, some Letters from St. Helena have been
  published, in which the above anecdotes are related, almost word for
  word. This and other circumstances induced me to make some inquiry
  respecting the publication; and I am enabled to affirm that, though
  anonymous, its contents are derived from the most authentic sources,
  and are entitled to full credit.

Among the many acts of kindness which the Emperor exercised towards the
English, who were detained in France, there is one which happened to
come within my own knowledge, and of which a Mr. Manning was the object.
This gentleman, whom I knew very well in Paris, and who had been induced
to travel for the sake of scientific investigation, thought he might
obtain his liberty by addressing a petition to Napoleon, praying for
permission to visit the interior of Asia. His friends laughed at his
simplicity; but he turned the laugh against us when, at the expiration
of a few weeks, he triumphantly informed us of the success of his
application. I find it mentioned in Dr. O’Meara’s work, that this same
Mr. Manning, after a peregrination of several years, touched at St.
Helena, on his return to Europe, and urgently requested leave to see
Napoleon, in order to express his gratitude by laying a few presents at
his feet, and answering any inquiries he might make respecting the Grand
Lama, whom he had had an opportunity of visiting through the Emperor’s
particular favour.

PHYSICAL ADVANTAGES OF RUSSIA.—HER POLITICAL POWER.—REMARKS ON
  INDIA.—PITT AND FOX.—IDEAS ON POLITICAL ECONOMY.—COMPANIES, OR FREE
  TRADE.—M. DE SUFFREN.—THE EMPEROR’S REMARKS ON THE NAVY.

6th.—The Emperor continued in a state of convalescence, and he received
some visitors about the middle of the day. I waited upon him,
accompanied by Madame de Montholon. He conversed a great deal about the
society of Paris, and related several anecdotes of the Tuileries.

In the evening, the Emperor resumed his geographical observations. He
dwelt particularly on Asia; on the situation of Russia, and the facility
with which the latter power might make an attempt on India, or even on
China, and the alarm which she might, therefore, justly excite in the
English. He calculated the number of troops that Russia might employ,
their probable point of departure, the route they would be likely to
pursue, and the wealth they would obtain in such an enterprise. On all
these subjects he made the most curious and valuable remarks. I very
much regret my inability to record them here, for my notes, in this
instance, afford me only slight hints, and I cannot trust to the
accuracy of my memory for filling up the details.

The Emperor next adverted to what he called the admirable situation of
Russia against the rest of Europe, to the immense mass she possessed for
invasion. He represented that power seated beneath the pole, and backed
by eternal bulwarks of ice, which, in case of need, would render her
inaccessible. Russia, he said, could only be attacked during one third
or fourth of the year; while, on the contrary, she had the whole year,
the whole twelve months, to act against us; her assailants would
encounter the rigours and privations of a frigid climate and a barren
soil, while her troops, pouring down upon us, would enjoy the fertility
and charms of our southern region.

To these physical circumstances, continued the Emperor, may be added the
advantage of an immense population, brave, hardy, devoted and passive,
including those numerous uncivilized hordes, to whom privation and
wandering are the natural state of existence. “Who can avoid
shuddering,” said he, “at the thought of such a vast mass, unassailable
either on the flanks or in the rear, descending upon us with impunity;
if triumphant, overwhelming every thing in its course; or, if defeated,
retiring amidst the cold and desolation, that may be called its reserves
in case of defeat; and possessing every facility of issuing forth again
at a future opportunity. Is not this the head of the Hydra, the Antæus
of fable, which can only be subdued by grappling it bodily, and stifling
it in one’s arms. But where is the Hercules to be found? France alone
could think of such an achievement, and it must be confessed we made but
an awkward attempt at it.”

The Emperor was of opinion that, in the new political combination of
Europe, the fate of that portion of the world depended entirely on the
capacity and disposition of a single man. “Should there arise,” said he,
“an Emperor of Russia, valiant, impetuous, and intelligent; in a word, a
Czar with a beard on his chin, (this he pronounced very emphaticallly)
Europe is his own. He may commence his operations on the German
territory, one hundred leagues from the two capitals, Berlin and Vienna,
whose sovereigns are his only obstacles. He secures the alliance of the
one by force, and with his aid subdues the other, at a single stroke. He
then finds himself in the heart of Germany, amidst the Princes of the
second rank, most of whom are either his relations or dependents.
Meanwhile, he may, should he think it necessary, throw a few firebrands
across the Alps, on the soil of Italy, ripe for explosion, and he may
then march triumphantly to Paris to proclaim himself the new Liberator.
I know if I were in such a situation, I would undertake to reach Calais
in a given time, and by regular marching stations, thereto become the
master and arbiter of Europe....” Then, after a few moments’ silence, he
added, “Perhaps, my dear Las Cases, you may be tempted to say, as the
minister of Pyrrhus said to his master, ‘_And after all, to what
purpose?_’ My answer is, to establish a new state of society, and to
avert great misfortunes. This is a blessing which Europe expects and
solicits. The old system is ended, and the new one is not consolidated,
and will not be so until after long and furious convulsions.”

The Emperor was again silent, and after measuring, with his compasses,
the distances on the map, he observed that Constantinople was, from its
situation, calculated to be the centre and seat of universal dominion.

He then alluded to the English settlements in India, and asked me
whether I knew any thing of their history. I told him what little I knew
on this subject.

Queen Elizabeth created an East India Company by virtue of her royal
prerogative.

A century later, the Parliament created another. However, as these two
companies were found to injure each other by their competitions, they
were united under one charter.

In 1716, the Company obtained from the sovereigns of India the famous
firman or Indian charter, authorizing them to export or import free of
all duty.

In 1741, the Company first commenced military interference in the
affairs of India, in opposition to the French Company, who took the
adverse side. Since then, the two nations have constantly waged war in
that distant land, whenever a contest arose between them in Europe.
France had a short interval of success in the war of 1740, was crushed
in 1755, maintained an equality in 1779, and at length totally
disappeared during the war of the Revolution.

The English East India Company now rules the whole peninsula, including
a population of more than 60,000,000, of which 20,000,000 are its
subjects, 20,000,000 its tributaries or allies, and the rest are
involved in its system and obliged to go along with it.[4]

Footnote 4:

  This was written in 1816, before those events took place in India, by
  which the subjection of the whole peninsula seems to have been
  accomplished.

Such is the famous East India Company, which at once acts the part of
merchant and sovereign; whose wealth is derived both from commercial
profits and territorial revenues. Hence it results that the merchant is
frequently actuated by the ambition of the sovereign, while the
sovereign plans, directs, and executes with the cupidity of the
merchant. In these peculiar circumstances, in this two-fold character,
we may trace the cause of the progress, measures, conflicts,
contradictions, disorders, and clamours, that compose the history of
this celebrated Company.

The English East India Company has long reigned absolute and
independent. It was and still continues to be represented by a Court of
Directors, chosen from among the proprietors. These Directors delegate
and direct in India, by despatches, a regency or council, consisting of
a Governor and some assessors, who represent and exercise the sovereign
authority.

In 1767, the Crown for the first time put forward claims on the
territory and revenues of India; but the Company purchased its
relinquishment of them by a subsidy equivalent to ten or twelve millions
of francs.

About the year 1773, the East India Company, finding its affairs
extremely deranged, made application to Parliament, which took advantage
of its embarrassment to secure its dependence. The Company’s possessions
were subjected to new political, judicial, and financial regulations,
which, however, produced no very satisfactory result. The Indian
peninsula was thrown into the utmost disorder; and the establishment of
a Supreme Court of Justice, operating as a rival to the Sovereign
Council, and appointed for the purpose of introducing English laws in
the country, particularly excited the dissatisfaction and alarm of the
natives. The fury of parties, and their reciprocal accusations and
complaints, have transmitted to us a picture of the odious measures, the
boundless rapacity and atrocious tyranny of this stormy period, which is
the least honourable in the history of the East India Company.

In 1783, with the view of providing a radical remedy for these evils,
Mr. Fox, who was then Prime Minister, brought forward his famous Bill,
the failure of which occasioned his resignation. Mr. Pitt, who had been
the opponent of this Bill, in the following year introduced another,
which laid the foundation of his celebrity, and which still continues to
regulate the affairs of the East India Company. Fox’s Bill would, in
fact, have been a judicial seizure; it would have placed all the
Company’s property in the hands of a managing committee, who were to
liquidate its debts, and dispose of all employments. The members of this
Committee, appointed by the King or by Parliament, were to be
irremoveable, and were to sit until they should have established the
affairs of the Company on a better footing. A general outcry was raised
against these propositions, which, it was said, would place important
interests, vast patronage, and enormous influence, in the hands of a few
individuals. It was said that the Bill was calculated to introduce a
fourth power in the state, and to set up a rival to the Crown itself.
Mr. Fox was even accused of a wish to establish himself permanently in
office, by creating a sort of concealed sovereignty, superior to that of
the King; for, Fox being at this time Minister, and having Parliament
under his control, he would have appointed and ruled the proposed
Committee. Through the influence of this Committee, he would have
composed and governed Parliament, and with the aid of Parliament, he
would have established and perpetuated the Committee; in short, there
was no end to the power which he would thus have exercised. A violent
clamour arose, and the King made the business a personal matter. He
appealed to his own friends, to those individuals in the House of Peers
who were sincerely attached to him, and regarded the measures proposed
as an attack on his very existence. The Bill failed, and Fox quitted the
ministry.

Pitt was more adroit, and assumed the appearance of greater moderation.
In his Bill, he merely contented himself with placing the Company under
a sort of guardianship; submitting all its operations to a Committee
appointed to revise and counter-sign them. He left to the Company the
power of nomination to all employments; but reserved to the Crown the
appointment of the Governor General, and the veto on all other
nominations. This Committee, which was appointed by the King, formed a
new branch in the administration. Complaints were now raised against the
vast increase of influence which this measure would give to the royal
authority, and which, it was affirmed, would infallibly break the
constitutional equilibrium. Fox had been reproached with having wished
to keep this influence wholly apart from the King; and Pitt was accused
of having placed it entirely in his hands. All that the one had desired
to do for the people, it was said the other had done for the monarch.
Indeed, these two distinct characters, these two opposite evils,
constituted the whole difference between the two Bills, which produced a
decisive battle between the Whigs and Tories. Mr. Pitt gained the
victory, and the Tories triumphed.

The faults of Fox’s Bill still remain hypothetical, since they were
never put to the test; but the evils that were predicted from Pitt’s
measures have been formally fulfilled. The equilibrium of power has been
broken, the true English constitution has ceased to exist, the royal
authority, daily augmented, has encroached in every direction, and is
now marching, unimpeded, on the high road, to arbitrary and absolute
power.

The Ministers command in Parliament a majority, which they have
themselves created, which perpetuates their power and legalizes their
arbitrary measures. Thus, English liberty is daily more and more
fettered by the very forms which were intended for its defence; and the
future, instead of affording a prospect of remedy, appears to threaten
greater misfortunes! How could Fox’s plan have produced more fatal
results? For it may truly be said that all the great encroachments that
have been made on the English constitution have been occasioned by the
interests of India. Surely the weight which Fox wished to secure to the
popular side could not have been more disastrous to the cause of liberty
than that with which Pitt surcharged the royal prerogative!

Consequently, it is now often boldly asserted that Fox was in the right,
that he was wiser, and could not have been so mischievous as his rival.

The names of Pitt and Fox having been thus introduced, the Emperor dwelt
long on the characters, systems, and measures of those two celebrated
statesmen; and concluded with the following remarks, which had already
fallen from him on several previous occasions: “Pitt,” said he, “was the
master of European policy; he held in his hand the moral fate of
nations; but he made an ill use of his power. He kindled the fire of
discord throughout the universe; and his name, like that of Erostratus,
will be inscribed in history, amidst flames, lamentations, and tears!...
The first sparks of our Revolution, then the resistance that was opposed
to the national will, and, finally, the horrid crimes that ensued, all
were his work. Twenty-five years of universal conflagration; the
numerous coalitions that added fuel to the flame; the revolution and
devastation of Europe; the bloodshed of nations; the frightful debt of
England, by which all these horrors were maintained; the pestilential
system of loans, by which the people of Europe are oppressed; the
general discontent that now prevails;—all must be attributed to Pitt.
Posterity will brand him as a scourge; and the man so lauded in his own
time will hereafter be regarded as the genius of evil. Not that I
consider him to have been really wicked, or doubt his having entertained
the conviction that he was acting right. But St. Bartholomew had also
its conscientious advocates; the Pope and Cardinals celebrated it by a
_Te Deum_; and we have no reason to doubt their having done so in
perfect sincerity. Such is the weakness of human reason and judgment!
But that for which posterity will, above all, execrate the memory of
Pitt, is the hateful school that he has left behind him, its insolent
Machiavelism, its profound immorality, its cold egotism, and its utter
disregard of justice and human happiness.

“Whether it be the effect of admiration and gratitude, or the result of
mere instinct and sympathy, Pitt is, and will continue to be, the idol
of the European aristocracy. There was, indeed, a touch of the Sylla in
his character. His system has kept the popular cause in check, and
brought about the triumph of the patricians. As to Fox, one must not
look for his model among the ancients. He is himself a model, and his
principles will sooner or later rule the world.”

The Emperor said a great deal about Fox, and expressed the great
attachment he entertained for him. He had had his bust put up at
Malmaison, before he knew him personally. He concluded with a remark,
which he used often to make, at different times, and in various ways:
“Certainly,” said he, “the death of Fox was one of the fatalities of my
career. Had his life been prolonged, affairs would have taken a totally
different turn; the cause of the people would have triumphed, and we
should have established a new order of things in Europe.”

Returning to the subject of the East India Company, the Emperor observed
that the question respecting the comparative advantage of the monopoly
of a company, or free trade for all, was an important subject of
consideration. “A Company,” said he, “places great advantages in the
hands of a few individuals, who may attend very well to their own
interests, while they neglect those of the mass. Thus every company soon
degenerates into an oligarchy: it is always the friend of power, to
which it is ready to lend every assistance. In this point of view,
companies were exclusively suited to old times and old systems. Free
trade, on the contrary, is favourable to the interests of all classes;
it excites the imagination and rouses the activity of a people; it is
identical with equality, and naturally leads to independence. In this
respect, it is most in unison with our modern system. After the treaty
of Amiens, by which France regained her Indian possessions, I had this
grand question thoroughly discussed before me, and at great length; I
heard both statesmen and commercial men; and my final opinion was in
favour of free trade, and against companies.”

The Emperor then discussed several points of political economy which are
treated by Smith in his _Wealth of Nations_. He admitted that they were
true in principle; but proved them to be false in application.
Unfortunately, the scantiness of my notes here prevents me from entering
into particulars.

“Formerly,” said he, “only one kind of property was known, that which
consisted in landed possessions; afterwards, a second kind arose, that
of industry or manufactures, which is now in opposition to the first;
then arose a third, that which is derived from the burdens levied on the
people, and which, distributed by the neutral and impartial hands of
government, might obviate the evils of monopoly on the part of the two
others, intervene between them, and prevent them from coming into actual
conflict.” This great contest of modern times, he called the war of the
_fields_ against the _factories_, of the _castles_ against the
_counting-houses_.

“It is,” said he, “because men will not acknowledge this great
revolution in property, because they persist in closing their eyes on
these truths, that so many acts of folly are now committed, and that
nations are exposed to so many disorders. The world has sustained a
great shock, and it now seeks to return to a settled state. There,” said
he, “is in two words, the Key to the universal agitation that at present
prevails: the ship’s cargo has been shifted, her ballast has been
removed from the stem to the stern; hence are produced those violent
oscillations which may occasion her wreck in the first storm, if the
crew persist in working the vessel according to the usual method, and
without obtaining a new balance.”

This day has been rich in materials for my Journal. Besides the subjects
to which I have already alluded, several others were introduced. When
speaking of India and the English East India Company, the name of M. de
Suffren was mentioned.

The Emperor had had no opportunity of forming a correct idea of the
character of this officer: he had heard of his having rendered important
services to his country and for that reason alone, he (Napoleon) had
been very liberal to his family. The Emperor questioned me respecting
Suffren. I had not known him personally, and therefore I could only
report what I had heard of him from other persons in the navy. It was
admitted that, since the time of Louis XIV., M. de Suffren was the only
officer who bore a resemblance to the distinguished men of the brilliant
period of our navy.

Suffren possessed genius, invention, ardour, ambition, and inflexible
steadiness; he was one of those men whom Nature has fitted for any
thing. I have heard very shrewd and sensible persons say that his death,
in the year 1789, might have been looked upon as a national calamity;
that, had he been admitted to the King’s Council in the critical moment,
he might have brought matters to a very different result. Suffren, who
was harsh, capricious, egotistical, and a very unpleasant companion, was
loved by nobody, though he was valued and admired by all.

He was a man with whom no one could live on good terms. He was impatient
of control, fond of condemning every thing, and, while he incessantly
declaimed against the utility of tactics, he proved himself to be a
perfect tactician. In short, he evinced all the irritability and
restlessness of genius and ambition deprived of elbow-room.

On obtaining the command of the Indian squadron, he went to take leave
of the King, and one of the officers of the palace could with difficulty
open a passage for him through the crowd. “I thank you,” said he to the
Usher, grunting and snorting in his usual way; “but when I come out,
Sir, you shall see that I know how to clear the way for myself.” And he
spoke truly.

On his arrival in India, he opened a new theatre for the arms of France,
and performed prodigies, which perhaps have not been duly appreciated in
Europe. He set on foot measures and plans of command hitherto unknown;
taking every thing upon himself, hazarding all, inventing all, and
foreseeing all. He broke and created his officers as he thought proper;
fitted out and manned ships that had long since been condemned; and
found a wintering station on the spot, when, according to the old
routine, the ships would have been obliged to sail to the Isle of
France, a distance of twelve or fifteen hundred leagues. Finally, he
broke through all rules, approached the coast, took on board troops who
had been fighting the old enemy, and, after they had assisted him in
opposing the English squadron, he conveyed them back to their camp, to
resume the contest by land. Thus the French flag assumed a superiority
that disconcerted the enemy. “Oh,” exclaimed the Emperor, “why did not
Suffren live till my time, or why did not I light on a man of his stamp?
I would have made him our Nelson. I was constantly seeking for a man
qualified to raise the character of the French navy; but I could never
find one. There is in the navy a peculiarity, a technicality, that
impeded all my conceptions. If I proposed a new idea, immediately
Ganthaume, and the whole Marine Department, were up in arms against
me.—‘Sire, that cannot be.‘—Why not?—‘Sire, the winds do not admit of
it:’ then objections were started respecting calms and currents, and I
was obliged to stop short. How is it possible to maintain a discussion
with those whose language we do not comprehend? How often, in the
Council of State, have I reproached naval officers with taking an undue
advantage of this circumstance! To hear them talk, one might have been
led to suppose that it was necessary to be born in the navy to know any
thing about it. Yet I often told them that, had it been in my power to
have performed a voyage to India with them, I should, on my return, have
been as familiar with their profession as with the field of battle. But
they could not credit this. They always repeated that no man could be a
good sailor unless he were brought up to it from his cradle; and they at
length prevailed on me to adopt a plan, about which I long hesitated,
namely, the enrolment of several thousands of children from six to eight
years of age.

“My resistance was vain; I was compelled to yield to the unanimous
voice, while I assured those who urged me to this measure that I left
all the responsibility with them. What was the result? It excited
clamour and discontent on the part of the public, who turned the whole
affair into ridicule, styling it the massacre of the innocents, &c.
Subsequently, De Winter, Verhuel, all the great naval commanders of the
north, and others, assured me that from eighteen to twenty (the age for
the conscription), was early enough to begin to learn the duties of a
sailor. The Danes and Swedes employ their soldiers in the navy. With the
Russians, the fleet is but a portion of the army; which affords the
invaluable advantage of keeping up a standing army, and for a twofold
object.

“I had myself,” added he, “planned something of the kind, when I created
my marines; but what obstacles had I to encounter; what prejudices had I
to subdue; what perseverance was I obliged to exert, before I could
succeed in clothing the sailors in uniform, forming them into regiments,
and drilling them by military exercise! I was told that I should ruin
all. And yet, can there be a greater advantage than for one country to
possess both an army and a navy? The men, thus disciplined, were not
worse sailors than the rest; while, at the same time, they were the best
soldiers. They were, in case of need, prepared to serve as sailors,
soldiers, artillerymen, pontooners, &c. If, instead of being thus
opposed by obstacles, I had found in the navy a man capable of entering
into my views, and promoting my ideas, what importance might we not have
obtained! But, during my reign, I never found a naval officer who could
depart from the old routine, and strike out a new course. I was much
attached to the navy; I admired the courage and patriotism of our
seamen; but I never found between them and me an intermediate agent, who
could have brought them into operation in the way I wished.”

NAPOLEON’S IMPERIAL SYSTEM.—PREFECTS.—AUDITORS OF THE COUNCIL OF
  STATE.—THE EMPEROR’S MOTIVES IN GRANTING LUCRATIVE APPOINTMENTS.—HIS
  FUTURE INTENTIONS.

7th.—Speaking of his imperial system, Napoleon observed that it had been
the means of creating the most compact government, establishing the most
rapid circulation in all its parts, and calling forth the most nervous
efforts that had ever been witnessed. “And nothing short of this,” said
he, “would have enabled us to triumph over such numerous difficulties,
and to achieve so many wonders. The organization of the Prefectures,
their operations, and the results they produced, were admirable. One and
the same impulse was simultaneously communicated to more than 40,000,000
of men; and, by the help of those centres of local activity, the
movement was not less rapid and energetic at the extremities than in the
heart itself.

“Foreigners who visited France, and who were capable of observing and
discerning, were filled with astonishment. To this uniformity of action
prevailing over an immense extent of territory, must be attributed those
prodigious efforts and immense results, which were acknowledged to have
been hitherto inconceivable.

“The Prefects, with their local authority and resources, were themselves
_Emperors on a small scale_. As their whole power proceeded from the
main spring, of which they were only the communicating channels; as
their influence was not personal, but was derived from their temporary
functions; as they had no connexion with the district over which their
jurisdiction extended; they afforded all the advantages of the great
absolute agents of the old system, without any of their disadvantages.
It was necessary to create this power,” continued the Emperor, “for the
force of circumstances had placed me in the situation of a dictator. It
was requisite that all the filaments issuing from me should be in
harmony with the first cause, or my system would have failed in its
result. The network which I spread over the French territory required a
violent tension and prodigious power of elasticity, in order to cause
the terrible blows that were constantly levelled at us to rebound to a
distance. Thus most of the springs of my machinery were merely
institutions connected with dictatorship, and measures for warlike
defence. When the moment should have arrived for slackening the reins,
all my connecting filaments would have relaxed sympathetically, and we
should then have proceeded to our peace establishment and local
institutions. If we yet possessed none of these, it was because
circumstances did not admit of them. Our immediate fall would have been
the infallible consequence, had we been provided with them at the
outset. It must not be supposed that the nation was all at once prepared
to make a proper use of her liberty. Both with respect to education and
character, the bulk of the people were imbued with too many of the
prejudices of past times. We were daily improving, but we had yet much
to acquire. At the time of the revolutionary explosion, the patriots,
generally speaking, were such by nature and by instinct: with them
patriotism was an innate sentiment, a passion, a phrensy. Hence the
effervescence, the extravagance, the fury, which marked that period. But
it is vain to attempt to naturalize and mature the modern system by
blows or by leaps. It must be implanted with education, and must take
root with reason and conviction; and this will infallibly take place in
the course of time, because modern principles are founded on natural
truths. But,” added he, “the men of our time were eager for the
possession of power, which they exercised with a domineering spirit, to
say no worse, while, on the other hand, they were ready to become the
slaves of those who were above them!... We have always wavered between
these two extremes. In the course of my journeys, I was often obliged to
say to the high officers who were about my person:—Pray let the Prefect
speak for himself. If I went to some subdivision of a department, I then
found it necessary to say to the Prefect:—Let the sub-prefect or the
mayor make his reply. So eager were all to eclipse each other, and so
little did they perceive the advantage that might arise from direct
communication with me! If I sent my great officers or ministers to
preside at the electoral colleges, I always advised them not to get
nominated as candidates for the Senate, as their seats were secured to
them by other means, and I wished that they should resign the honour of
the nomination to the principal individuals of the provinces: but they
never conformed with my wishes.”

This reminded me of a misunderstanding that once took place, between the
Emperor and the Minister Decrès, on the subject here alluded to. The
Emperor having expressed displeasure at the nomination of the
minister:—“Sire,” replied the latter, “your influence is more powerful
than your will. I in vain resisted, and assured them that you wished
these nominations to be made among themselves. They insisted on shewing
deference to your choice, and if you send me back, I shall only be
nominated over again.”

“I granted,” said Napoleon, “enormous salaries to Prefects and others;
but, with regard to my liberality on this head, it is necessary to
distinguish between what was systematic and what was incidental. The
latter forced me to grant lucrative appointments; the former would
ultimately have enabled me to obtain gratuitous services. At the first
outset, when the object was to conciliate individuals, and to
re-establish some kind of society and morality, liberal salaries,
absolute fortunes, were indispensable; but, the result being obtained,
and in the course of time the natural order of things being restored, my
intention, on the contrary, would have been to render almost all high
public duties gratuitous. I would have discarded those needy individuals
who cannot be their own masters, and whose urgent wants engender
political immorality. I would have wrought such a change in opinion that
public posts should have been sought after for the mere honour of
filling them. The functions of magistrate or justice of the peace would
have been discharged by men of fortune, who, being guided solely by
duty, philanthropy, and honourable ambition, would have afforded the
surest pledge of independence. It is this that constitutes the dignity
and majesty of a nation, that exalts her character, and establishes
public morals. Such a change had become indispensable in France, and the
dislike of getting into place might have been considered the forerunner
of our return to political morality. I have been informed that the mania
of place-hunting has crossed the sea, and that the contagion has been
communicated to our neighbours. The English of former days were as much
superior to this kind of meanness as the people of the United States now
are. The love of place is the greatest check to public morals. A man who
solicits a public post feels his independence sold beforehand. In
England, the greatest families, the whole peerage, disdain not to hunt
after places. Their excuse is that the enormous burdens of taxation
deprive them of the means of living without additions to their income.
Pitiful pretence! It is because their principles are more decayed than
their fortunes. When people of a certain rank stoop to solicit public
posts for the sake of emolument, there is an end to all independence and
dignity of national character. In France, the shocks and commotions of
our Revolution might have afforded an apology for such conduct. All had
been unsettled, and all felt the necessity of re-establishing
themselves. To promote this object, with the least possible offence to
delicacy of feeling, I was induced to attach considerable emolument and
high honour to all public posts. But, in the course of time, I intended
to work a change by the mere force of opinion. And this was by no means
impossible. Every thing must yield to the influence of power, when it is
directed to objects truly just, honourable, and great.

“I was preparing a happy reign for my son. For his sake I was rearing in
the new school, the numerous class of auditors of the Council of State.
Their education being completed, they would, on attaining the proper
age, have filled all the public posts in the Empire; thus confirmed in
modern principles, and improved by the example of their precursors. They
would all have been twelve or fifteen years older than my son, who would
by this means have been placed between two generations and all their
advantages: maturity, experience and prudence above him; youth,
promptitude, and activity below him.”

Here I could not refrain from expressing my astonishment that the
Emperor should never have thrown out a hint of the grand and important
objects which he had in contemplation. “What would have been the use of
promulgating my intentions,” said he; “I should have been styled a
quack, accused of insinuation and subtilty, and have fallen into
discredit. Situated as I was, deprived of hereditary authority, and of
the illusion called legitimacy, I was compelled to avoid entering the
lists with my opponents; I was obliged to be bold, imperious, and
decisive. You have told me that in your Faubourg they used to say, _Why
is he not legitimate?_ If I had been so, I certainly could not have done
more than I did; but my conduct might have appeared more amiable.”

LA VENDÉE.—CHARETTE.—LAMARQUE.—TRAGEDIES OF ÆSCHYLUS AND SOPHOCLES.—REAL
  TRAGEDIES AMONG THE ROMANS.—SENECA’S MEDEA.—SINGULAR FACT.

8th—To-day the Emperor dictated to one of his suite, by which we were
very much gratified, for it was a proof that he felt himself better.

I attended him after dinner. The exertion of dictating seemed to have
roused his spirits. He was in a very talkative mood; and we conversed
together, walking backward and forward in his chamber. The troubles of
La Vendée, and the men who had been distinguished in them, formed the
principal topics of discourse.

Charette was the only individual to whom the Emperor attached particular
importance. “I have read a history of La Vendée,” said he, “and if the
details and portraits were correct, Charette was the only great
character, the true hero, of that remarkable episode of our Revolution,
which, if it presented great misfortunes, at least did not sacrifice our
glory. In the wars of La Vendée, Frenchmen destroyed each other; but
they did not degrade themselves: they received aid from foreigners; but
they did not stoop to the disgrace of marching under their banners, and
receiving daily pay for merely executing their commands. Yes,” continued
he, “Charette impressed me with the idea of a great character. I
observed that he on several occasions acted with uncommon energy and
intrepidity. He betrayed genius.” I mentioned that I had known Charette
very well in my youth; had been in the marines together at Brest, and
for a long time we shared the same chamber, and messed at the same
table. The brilliant career and exploits of Charette very much
astonished all who had formerly been acquainted with him. We looked upon
him as a common-place sort of man, destitute of information,
ill-tempered, and extremely indolent; and we all, with one accord,
pronounced him to belong to the class of insignificant beings. It is
true that, when he began to rise into celebrity, we recollected a
circumstance which certainly indicated decision of character. When
Charette was first called into service, during the American war, and
while yet a mere youth, he sailed from Brest in a cutter during the
winter. The cutter lost her mast; and to a vessel of that class such an
accident was equivalent to certain destruction. The weather was very
stormy. Death seemed inevitable; and the sailors, throwing themselves on
their knees, lost all presence of mind, and refused to make any effort
to save themselves. Charette, notwithstanding his extreme youth, killed
one of the men, in order to compel the rest to make the necessary
exertions. This dreadful example had the desired effect, and the vessel
was saved. “You see,” said the Emperor, “true decision of character
always develops itself in critical circumstances. Here was the spark
that distinguished the hero of La Vendée. Men’s dispositions are often
misunderstood. There are sleepers whose waking is terrible. Kleber was
an habitual slumberer; but, at the needful moment, he never failed to
awake, a lion.”

I added that I had often heard Charette relate that, at a particular
moment of extreme danger, the whole crew of the cutter, by a spontaneous
impulse, made a vow to go in their shirts and barefooted, to carry a
taper to our Lady of Recouvrance, at Brest, if she would vouchsafe to
ensure their safety. “And you may believe it or not as you please,”
added Charette with great simplicity: “but the fact is, they had no
sooner uttered their prayer than the wind suddenly abated, and from that
moment we were inspired with the hope of preservation.” On their return
to land, the sailors, headed by their officers, devoutly fulfilled their
vow. This was not the only miraculous circumstance connected with the
little cutter. It was in the month of December, and the night was long
and dark. The vessel had got among reefs, and, without mast or any
nautical aid, she floated at random, and the crew had resigned
themselves to the will of fate, when they unexpectedly heard the ringing
of a bell. They sounded, and, finding but little depth of water, they
cast anchor. What was their surprise and joy, when they found
themselves, at day-break, at the mouth of the river of Landernau! The
bell they had heard was that of the neighbouring parish church. The
cutter had miraculously escaped the numerous rocks that are scattered
about the entrance of Brest: she had been carried through the narrow
inlet to the port, had passed three or four hundred ships that were
lying in the roads, and had at length found a shelter precisely at the
mouth of a river, in a calm and retired spot. “This,” said the Emperor,
“shews the difference between the blindfold efforts of man, and the
certain course of nature. That at which you express so much surprise
must necessarily have happened. It is very probable that, with the full
power of exerting the utmost skill, the confusion and errors of the
moment would have occasioned the wreck of the vessel; whereas, in spite
of so many adverse chances, nature saved her. She was borne onward by
the tide; the force of the current carried her precisely through the
middle of each channel, so that she could not possibly have been lost.”

Again alluding to the war of La Vendée, the Emperor mentioned that he
had been withdrawn from the army of the Alps, for the purpose of being
transferred to that of La Vendée; but that he preferred resigning his
commission to entering a service where he conceived he should only be
concurring in mischief, without the probability of obtaining any
personal benefit. He said that one of the first acts of his Consulate
had been to quell the troubles in La Vendée. He did much for that
unfortunate department, the inhabitants of which were very grateful to
him; and when he passed through it, even the priests appeared to be
sincerely favourable to him. “Thus,” continued the Emperor, “the late
insurrections did not present the same character as the first. Their
prominent feature was not blind fanaticism, but merely passive obedience
to a ruling aristocracy. Be this as it may, Lamarque, whom I sent to La
Vendée at the height of the crisis, performed wonders, and even
surpassed my hopes.” What might not have been his influence in the great
contest; for the most distinguished chiefs of La Vendée, those who are
doubtless at this moment enjoying the favours of the Court,
acknowledged, through Lamarque, Napoleon as Emperor, even after
Waterloo, even after his abdication! Was it that Lamarque was ignorant
of the real state of things, or was it merely a whim on the part of the
conqueror? At all events, Lamarque is in exile: he is one of the
thirty-eight; “because it is easier to proscribe than to conquer.”

The Emperor dined with us to-day, for the first time since his illness,
that is to say, for the space of sixteen days. Our dinner was therefore
a sort of festival: but we could not help remarking, with regret, the
change in the Emperor’s countenance, which presented obvious traces of
the ill effects of his long confinement.

After dinner we resumed our readings, which had been so long suspended.
The Emperor read the Agamemnon of Æschylus, which he very much admired
for its great force and simplicity. We were particularly struck with the
graduation of terror which characterizes the productions of this father
of tragedy. It was observed that this was the first spark to which the
light of the modern drama may be traced.

Agamemnon being ended, the Emperor asked for the Œdipus of Sophocles,
which also interested us exceedingly: and the Emperor expressed his
regret at not having had it performed at St. Cloud. Talma had always
opposed the idea; but the Emperor was sorry that he had relinquished it.
“Not,” said he, “that I wished to correct our drama by antique models.
Heaven forbid! But I merely wished to have an opportunity of judging how
far ancient composition would have harmonized with modern notions.” He
said he was convinced that such a performance would have afforded
pleasure; and he made several remarks on the impression that was likely
to be produced on modern taste by the Greek Coryphæus chorusses, &c.

He next turned to Voltaire’s Œdipus, on which he bestowed high
commendation. This piece, he said, contained the finest scene in the
French Drama. As to its faults, the absurd passion of Philoctetes, for
example, they must not, he said, be attributed to the poet, but to the
manners of the age, and the great actresses of the day, to whose laws a
dramatic writer is obliged to submit. This commendation of Voltaire
rather surprised us: it was something novel and singular in the mouth of
the Emperor.

At eleven o’clock, after the Emperor had retired to bed, he sent for me,
and resumed his conversation on the ancient and modern drama; on which
he made many curious remarks. In the first place, he expressed his
surprise that the Romans should have had no tragedies; but then again he
observed that tragedy, in dramatic representation, would have been ill
calculated to rouse the feelings of the Romans, since they performed
real tragedy in their circuses. “The combats of the gladiators,” said
he, “the sight of men consigned to the fury of wild beasts, were far
more terrible than all our dramatic horrors put together. These, in
fact, were the only tragedies suited to the iron nerves of the Romans.”

However, it was observed that the Romans possessed some dramatic essays,
produced by Seneca. By the by, it is a curious fact, that in Seneca’s
Medea, the chorus distinctly predicts the discovery of America, which
took place fourteen hundred years after that drama was written. In the
passage here alluded to, it is said, “A new Tiphys, a son of the earth,
will, in ages to come, discover remote regions towards the west, and
Thule will no longer be the extremity of the universe.”[5]

Footnote 5:

                        ... venient annis
            Sæcula seris, quibus Oceanus
            Vincula rerum laxet, et ingens
            Pateat tellus, Tiphysque novos
            Detegat orbes, nec sit terris ultima Thule.
                           _End of the Chorus of the 2d Act of
                                   Seneca’s Medea._

           THE EMPEROR CONSIDERABLY BETTER.—INFERNAL MACHINE

STORY.—MADAME R—-- DE ST. J—-- D’A—-- —THE TWO EMPRESSES.—JOSEPHINE’S
EXTRAVAGANCE.—CHARACTERISTIC ANECDOTES OF THE EMPEROR.



9th.—To-day the Emperor felt himself infinitely better. He was
surrounded by all his suite, and he began to talk of the prodigies of
his early career, which, he said, must have produced a great impression
in the world. “So great an impression,” said an individual present,
“that some were induced to regard them as supernatural.” On this
subject, the following anecdote was related: At the time of the
explosion of the infernal machine, a person, who had just heard the
news, called at a house in a certain quarter of the capital, and,
hastily entering the drawing-room, in which a party was assembled, he
informed the company that Napoleon was no more; and after giving an
account of the event that had just taken place, he concluded by saying:
“He is fairly blown up.” “He blown up!” exclaimed an old Austrian
officer, who had eagerly listened to all that was said, and who had been
a witness to many of the dangers which the young General of the army of
Italy had so miraculously escaped; “he blown up! Ah! you know nothing
about him. I venture to say that he is, at this very moment, as well as
any of us. I know him and all his tricks of old!”

The name of Madame R—-- de St. J—-- d’A—-- having been mentioned, and
some one having remarked to the Emperor how much attachment she had
evinced for him during his stay at the Isle of Elba. “How! she?”
exclaimed the Emperor, with mingled surprise and satisfaction.—“Yes,
Sire.”—“Poor lady!” said he, in a tone of deep regret; “and yet how ill
I treated her! Well! this at least repays me for the ingratitude of
those renegades, on whom I lavished so many favours....” Then, after a
few moments’ silence, he said, significantly, “It is very certain that
one can never know people’s characters and sentiments until after great
trials.“

At dinner, the Emperor was very good humoured and cheerful. He
congratulated himself on having got through his late illness, without
having recourse to medicine, without paying tribute to the Doctor. At
this, he said, the latter had been very much vexed. He would have been
content with ever so little, with the slightest acknowledgment; he only
asked for compliance with the form, like a priest in confession. The
Emperor laughed, and added, that, out of mere complaisance, he had made
trial of a gargle, but that its strong acidity had disagreed with him.
This led him to observe that mild medicines were best suited to his
constitution. “Gentle remedies, whether physical or moral,” said he,
“are the only ones that take effect on me.”

In the course of conversation, the Emperor spoke of the Empresses
Josephine and Maria Louisa, of whom he related some very interesting
details, and concluded with his usual observation, that the one was the
model of the graces, with all their fascinations; and the other the
emblem of innocence, with all its charms.

The Emperor mentioned that Malmaison had cost about three or four
hundred thousand francs: that is to say, all that he was at that time
possessed of. He then calculated the amount of the sums which the
Empress Josephine must have received from him: and added that, with a
little order and regularity, she might, probably, have left behind her
fifty or sixty million francs. “Her extravagance,” said the Emperor,
“vexed me beyond measure. Calculator as I am, I would, of course, rather
have given away a million of francs than have seen a hundred thousand
squandered away.” He informed us that, having one day unexpectedly
broken in upon Josephine’s morning circle, he found a celebrated
milliner, whom he had expressly forbidden to go near the Empress, as she
was ruining her by extravagant demands. “My unlooked for entrance
occasioned great dismay in the academic sitting. I gave some orders
unperceived, and on the lady’s departure, she was seized and carried to
Bicètre. A great outcry was raised among the higher circles in Paris; it
was said that my conduct was disgraceful. It soon became the fashion to
visit the milliner in her confinement, and there was daily a file of
carriages at the gate of the prison. The police informed me of these
facts. All the better, said I; but I hope she is not treated with
severity; not confined in a dungeon?—‘No, Sire, she has a suite of
apartments, and a drawing room.’ Oh, well! let her be. If this measure
is pronounced to be tyrannical, so much the better; it will be a
diapason stroke for a great many others. Very little will serve to shew
that I can do more.” He also mentioned a celebrated man-milliner, who,
he remarked, was the most insolent fellow he had ever met with in the
whole course of his life. “I was one day,” said the Emperor, “speaking
to him respecting a _trousseau_ that he had furnished, when he had the
presumption to call my conduct in question. He did what no man in
France, except himself, would have ventured to do; he began, with great
volubility, to prove to me that I did not grant a sufficient allowance
to the Empress Josephine; and that it was impossible she could pay for
her clothes out of such a sum. I soon put an end to his impertinent
eloquence; I cut him short with a look, and left him transfixed.”

When the Emperor had retired to his chamber, he sent for me, and after
he had gone to bed, he continued to converse very cheerfully, on various
subjects. He said he found himself much better, and that he felt a
pleasure in chatting. However, he was very much troubled with cough, and
this had forced him to rise from table earlier than he otherwise would
have done. “I unthinkingly took too much snuff,” said he, “my attention
having been absorbed in the conversation of the moment. In such a case
you should always take away my snuff-box: that is the way to serve those
one loves.”

WAR ON HIGH ROADS.—DUMOURIEZ MORE DARING THAN NAPOLEON.—PRINCESS
  CHARLOTTE OF WALES AND THE PRINCE OF SAXE COBOURG.

10th.—For some days past, the Emperor has been reading works on war,
fortifications, artillery, &c. He has examined Vauban, an account of
Campaigns during the Revolution, Gassendi’s Dictionary, and Guibert’s
Tactics; with all of which he is much pleased. These subjects have led
him to speak of several Generals who have already been frequently
noticed in the course of this Journal. “They could only carry on war on
high roads,” said he, “and within range of cannon, when their field of
battle should have extended over a whole country.”

During dinner, he spoke of the Campaign of Dumouriez in Champagne, which
he had just been reading. He thought little of the Duke of Brunswick,
who with a plan of offensive operations, had advanced only eighteen
leagues in forty days. But, on the other hand, he very much blamed
Dumouriez, whose position, he said, was far too hazardous. “For me, this
is saying a great deal,” added he; “for I consider myself to have been
the most venturous man in war that perhaps ever lived. Yet I should
certainly have been afraid to keep the position that Dumouriez retained;
so numerous were the dangers it presented. I could only explain his
manœuvre, on the supposition that he could not venture to retire; he
would probably have encountered greater risks in retreating than in
staying where he was. Wellington was placed in the same situation at
Waterloo.

“The French are the bravest troops in the world. They will fight in
whatever position they may be attacked; but they cannot retreat before a
victorious enemy. If they experience the least check, they lose all
presence of mind and discipline; they slip through your fingers, as it
were. Dumouriez, I suppose, calculated on this; or perhaps he might have
been influenced by some secret negotiation of which we are ignorant.”

The newspapers, which we perused to-day, mentioned the marriage of
Prince Leopold of Saxe Coburg to the Princess Charlotte of Wales.

“Prince Leopold,” said the Emperor, “once had a chance of becoming my
aid-de-camp. He solicited the appointment, and I don’t know what
prevented his obtaining it. However, it was lucky for him that his
application proved unsuccessful: had it been otherwise, his present
marriage would never have taken place. Who can pretend to say what is
fortunate or unfortunate in the events of human life!...”

Princess Charlotte of Wales next became the subject of conversation.
Some one observed that she was exceedingly popular in England, and that
she had given many unequivocal proofs of energy of character. The
English were of opinion that she would be another Elizabeth, and she
herself seemed to cherish that idea. The person who made these remarks
said that he happened to be in London in 1814, at the time when the
young Princess, indignant at the ill treatment of her mother, slipped
away from the Prince Regent’s, and stepping into the first hackney coach
she met with in the street, drove to the residence of her mother, to
whom she was fondly attached. On this occasion the natural severity of
the English relaxed into indulgence; and all were inclined to pardon the
breach of decorum, in consideration of the amiable sentiment that had
occasioned it. The young Princess would not leave her mother, until the
Duke of York, or another of her uncles, and, as it was said, the Lord
Chancellor, prevailed on her to go back to her father’s, by assuring her
that to persist in the course she had adopted would endanger her
mother’s happiness, perhaps, even her life.

Princess Charlotte had already given a proof of decision of character,
in refusing to marry the Prince of Orange. Her reason for rejecting this
alliance was that it would have obliged her occasionally to reside out
of England; and this truly national sentiment contributed to render her
the more dear to the English people.

The English who are at St. Helena assure us that her union with the
Prince of Saxe Coburg was perfectly in unison with her own wishes, and
that she publicly declared she looked forward to happiness, because in
her choice she had been guided purely by sentiment. She was said to be
much attached to Prince Leopold.—“I readily believe it,” said the
Emperor: “I recollect him very well; and when he appeared at the
Tuileries, I thought him one of the handsomest young men I ever saw.”
Within these few days, the English who are here have related an incident
which they regard as a proof of high spirit and dignity of feeling on
the part of their future Queen. Previously to her marriage, one of the
Ministers waited upon her for the purpose of settling some domestic
details; and, having submitted to her some propositions which she did
not conceive to be sufficiently liberal,—“My Lord,” said she, “I am
heiress to the throne of Great Britain; and my mind has risen to a level
with the exalted station I am destined to fill. Therefore, I must be
provided for accordingly. Do not imagine that, in marrying Prince
Leopold, I ever can or will sink to the rank of _Mistress Coburg_.
Entertain no such idea, I beg of you.”

The young Princess is the idol of the English people, who look forward
to her reign as affording the prospect of future happiness.

The Emperor, again alluding to Prince Leopold, and the chance he had of
becoming his aide-de-camp, said:—“A crowd of German Princes solicited
the same favour. When I established the Confederation of the Rhine, the
Sovereigns who were included in it took it for granted that I intended
to revive in my person the etiquette and forms of the Holy Roman Empire;
and all, even Kings themselves, were eager to join my retinue. One
wished to be appointed my cup-bearer, another my grand butler, &c. At
this period, the Princes of Germany literally invaded the Tuileries;
they crowded the saloons, and modestly mingled with the officers of my
household. It was the same with the Italians, Spaniards, and Portuguese;
in short, all the most exalted personages in Europe were assembled at
the Tuileries. The fact is,” added the Emperor, “that, during my reign,
Paris was the queen of nations and the French the first nation in the
world!...”

REMARKS ON SEVERAL IMPORTANT SUBJECTS.—NAPOLEON’S DEBUT IN
  DIPLOMACY.—CONCENTRATION OF THE NATIONS OF EUROPE.—CONQUEST OF
  SPAIN.—DANGER OF RUSSIA.—BERNADOTTE.

11th.—The Emperor did not leave his chamber to-day. I spent nearly the
whole of the day with him; for I only left him to go to dinner.

The conversations of the day were diffuse and interesting, for the
Emperor was exceedingly chatty. He discussed numerous subjects,
perfectly heterogeneous in their nature, though they were naturally
introduced one by another. His conversation abounded with ideas and
facts totally new to me. But the number and importance of the Emperor’s
remarks rendered it impossible for me to seize them all. My eagerness to
note down the past observation sometimes occasioned the present one to
escape me; but, for this very reason, I can, with the greater
confidence, vouch for the accuracy of what I have preserved.

Speaking of the elements of society, the Emperor said: “Democracy may be
furious; but it has some heart, it may be moved. As to aristocracy, it
is always cold and unforgiving.”

At another time, after some preliminary observations, he said;—“All
human institutions present two opposite points of view; all have their
advantages and disadvantages: for example, both republican and
monarchical government may be defended and opposed. Doubtless, it is
easy to prove in theory that both are equally good, and very good; but
this is not quite so easy in application.” He remarked that the extreme
boundary of the government of many was anarchy; and that the extreme
boundary of the government of a single one was despotism; that a just
medium between both was unquestionably the best, were it in the power of
wisdom steadily to pursue such a course. He added, these truths had been
repeated until they had become absolutely commonplace, without producing
any good result; that on this subject many volumes had been written, and
many would still be written without effect.

The Emperor at another moment said: “Despotism is not absolute; but
merely relative. A man cannot with impunity absorb all power within
himself. If a Sultan strikes off the heads of his subjects, according to
the whim of the moment, he runs the risk of losing his own by the same
sort of caprice. Excess will always incline either to one side or the
other. What the sea gains by encroachment in one direction, it loses
elsewhere. When I was in Egypt, a conqueror, an absolute ruler and
master, dictating laws to the people by mere orders of the day, I could
not have presumed to search the houses, and it would have been out of my
power to prevent the inhabitants from speaking freely in their
coffee-houses, where liberty and independence prevailed even in a
greater degree than in Paris. The people yielded like slaves in all
other places; but they resolved to enjoy full liberty in their
coffee-houses, which were absolutely the citadels of freedom, the
bazaars of public opinion. Here they loudly declaimed, and passed
judgment, on the measures of the day: it would have been impossible to
close their mouths. If I happened to enter these places, all bowed
before me, it is true; but this was a mark of esteem to me personally.
No such homage was shewn to any lieutenants.

“Be this as it may,” said he, alluding to another topic, “France, when
subject to the opposing influences of many, was on the point of falling
beneath the blows of combined Europe: but she placed the helm in the
hands of one, and immediately the First Consul laid down the law to
Europe. Such is the power of unity and concentration; these are facts
which must be convincing to the meanest understandings.

“It was curious to observe that the old cabinets of Europe were unable
to conceive the importance of this change, and that they continued to
treat with unity and concentration, in the same manner as they had done
with the multitude and dispersion. It is not less remarkable that the
Emperor Paul, who was looked upon as a madman, was the first to
appreciate this difference; while the English Ministers, reputed to be
so skilful and experienced, were the very last. ‘_I set aside the
abstractions of your Revolution_,’ Paul wrote to me, ‘_I confine myself
to a fact; that is sufficient for me: in my eyes you are a government,
and I address myself to you, because we can understand each other, and I
can treat with you_.’

“With regard to the English Ministry, I was ever obliged to conquer and
force to peace, and absolutely to detach England from the rest of
Europe, before I could make them to listen to me; and even when they
opened negotiations with me, they drawled on in the ruts of the old
routine. They tried to divert my attention by delays, protocols, forms,
ceremonies, precedents, and I know not what. But I felt myself so
powerful that I could afford to laugh at all this!

“A new state of things required a new line of conduct; but the English
Ministers seemed to have no idea of the age, or of the men and things
belonging to it. My manner quite disconcerted them. I commenced in
diplomacy, as I had already commenced in arms. These are my
propositions, said I, to the English Ministry:—we are masters of Holland
and Switzerland; but I am ready to resign both, in return for the
restitutions that you make to us or our allies. We are also masters of
Italy, of which I will surrender one portion and retain the other, for
the purpose of guaranteeing the existence of all. These are my bases;
build upon them as much as you please; I care not for that; but the
object and result must remain as I have specified. I will not yield a
hair’s breadth of my determination. My object is not to purchase
concessions from you; but to enter into reasonable, honourable, and
lasting engagements. This is the circle I have traced out. It appears to
me that you have formed no notion of our respective situations or
resources. I fear not your refusal, your efforts, or any difficulties
you may throw in my way. I have a strong arm, and I only want a weight
to lift.

“This unusual language,” continued the Emperor, “produced the desired
effect. In the negotiations at Amiens, they had intended merely to
divert us; but they now began to treat seriously. Not knowing at what
point I was vulnerable, they offered to make me King of France. This was
a good idea! King, by the grace of foreigners, when I was already
Sovereign by the will of the people!...

“Such was the ascendency I had acquired that, even while the
negotiations were pending, I caused the Italians to assign to me the
Presidency of their Republic; and this circumstance, which, in the
ordinary course of European diplomacy, would naturally have created so
many obstacles, occasioned no interruption of the proceedings. Matters
were brought to a conclusion; and I gained my point by plain dealing,
better than if I had fallen into all the usual diplomatic subtleties.
Many libellous pamphlets, and manifestoes of no better character,
accused me of perfidy, and of breach of faith in my negotiations; but I
never merited these charges, which, on the contrary, might always have
been justly applied to the other cabinets of Europe.

“At Amiens, I sincerely thought that the fate of France and Europe, and
my own destiny, were permanently fixed; I hoped that war was at an end.
However, the English Cabinet again kindled the flame. England is alone
responsible for all the miseries by which Europe has since been
afflicted. For my part, I intended to have devoted myself wholly to the
internal interests of France; and I am confident that I should have
wrought miracles. I should have lost nothing in the scale of glory; and
I should have gained much in the scale of happiness. I should then have
achieved the moral conquest of Europe, which I was afterwards on the
point of accomplishing by force of arms. Of how much glory was I thus
deprived!

“My enemies always spoke of my love of war; but was I not constantly
engaged in self-defence? After every victory I gained, did I not
immediately make proposals for peace?

“The truth is that I never was master of my own actions. I never was
entirely myself. I might have conceived many plans; but I never had it
in my power to execute any. I held the helm with a vigorous hand; but
the fury of the waves was greater than any force that I could exert in
resisting them; and I prudently yielded, rather than incur the risk of
sinking through stubborn opposition. I never was truly my own master;
but was always controlled by circumstances. Thus, at the commencement of
my rise, during the Consulate, my sincere friends and warm partisans
frequently asked me, with the best intentions, and as a guide for their
own conduct, _what point I was driving at?_ and I always answered that I
did not know. They were surprised, probably dissatisfied, and yet I
spoke the truth. Subsequently, during the Empire, when there was less
familiarity, many faces seemed to put the same question to me; and I
might still have given the same reply. In fact, I was not master of my
actions, because I was not fool enough to attempt to twist events into
conformity with my system. On the contrary, I moulded my system
according to the unforeseen succession of events. This often appeared
like unsteadiness and inconsistency, and of these faults I was sometimes
unjustly accused.”

After alluding to some other subjects, the Emperor said, “One of my
great plans was the re-uniting, the concentration, of those same
geographical nations which have been separated and parcelled out by
revolution and policy. There are in Europe, dispersed, it is true,
upwards of thirty millions of French, fifteen millions of Spaniards,
fifteen millions of Italians, and thirty millions of Germans; and it was
my intention to incorporate these people each into one nation. It would
have been a noble thing to have advanced into posterity with such a
train, and attended by the blessings of future ages. I felt myself
worthy of this glory!

“After this summary simplification, it would have been possible to
indulge the chimera of the _beau ideal_ of civilization. In this state
of things, there would have been some chance of establishing, in every
country, a unity of codes, principles, opinions, sentiments, views, and
interests. Then, perhaps, by the help of the universal diffusion of
knowledge, one might have thought of attempting, in the great European
family, the application of the American Congress, or the Amphictyons of
Greece; and then what a perspective of power, greatness, happiness, and
prosperity! What a grand, what a magnificent, spectacle!

“The concentration of the thirty or forty millions of Frenchmen was
completed and perfected; and that of the fifteen millions of Spaniards
was nearly accomplished; for nothing is more common than to convert
accident into principle. Because I did not subdue the Spaniards, it will
henceforth be argued that they were invincible. But the fact is that
they were actually conquered, and at the very moment when they escaped
me, the Cortes of Cadiz were secretly in treaty with me. They were not
delivered either by their own resistance or the efforts of the English,
but by the reverses which I sustained at distant points; and, above all,
by the error I committed in removing with all my whole forces to the
distance of a thousand leagues from them, and in having perished there;
for nobody can deny that if, as soon as I entered that country, Austria
had not declared war against me, but had left me four months longer
quietly in Spain,[6] the business would have been finished there; the
Spanish Government would have been consolidated; the public mind would
have been tranquillized; the different parties would have rallied. Three
or four years would have restored the Spaniards to profound peace and
brilliant prosperity: they would have become a compact nation, and I
should have well deserved their gratitude; for I should have saved them
from the tyranny by which they are now oppressed, and the terrible
agitations that await them.

Footnote 6:

  On this very subject, Napoleon thus expressed himself: “The presence
  of the General is indispensable; he is the head, he is the whole of an
  army. It was not the Roman army that subdued Gaul, but Cæsar; it was
  not the Carthaginian army that made the Republic tremble at the gates
  of Rome, but Hannibal; it was not the Macedonian army that was on the
  Indus, but Alexander; it was not the French army that carried the war
  to the Weser and the Inn, but Turenne; it was not the Prussian army
  that for seven years defended Prussia against the greatest powers of
  Europe, but Frederick the Great.” (_Memoires de Napoleon, tom. 2. p.
  90._)

“With regard to the fifteen millions of Italians, their concentration
was already far advanced: it only wanted maturity. The people were daily
becoming more firmly established in the unity of principles and
legislation; and also in the unity of thought and feeling, that certain
and infallible cement of human concentration. The union of Piedmont with
France, and the junction of Parma, Tuscany and Rome, were, in my mind,
but temporary measures, intended merely to guarantee and promote the
national education of the Italians.[7] You may judge of the correctness
of my views, and of the influence of common laws. The portions of Italy
that had been united to France, though that union might have been
regarded as the insult of conquest on our part, were, in spite of their
Italian patriotism, the very parts that continued by far the most
attached to us. Now that they are restored to themselves, they conceive
that they have been invaded and disinherited; and so they certainly have
been!...

Footnote 7:

  So important a determination, as that of the future abandonment of
  Italy, thus pronounced for the first time, and in a manner so
  indifferent, without the development of any object, or the support of
  any proof, would be, I confess, entitled to no higher consideration,
  than the assertions that are so frequently hazarded and excused in the
  warmth of conversation. But time and intimacy have taught me that
  every declaration made by Napoleon, under such circumstances, carried
  along with it its full, whole, and literal meaning. I have always
  found this to be the case whenever I have had the means of
  verification. I make this observation, lest the reader should also be
  led to doubt, too hastily, without obtaining, or, at least, without
  seeking for proof.

  I now find, for example, in vol. i. of Napoleon’s Memoirs, dictated to
  Count Montholon, so complete and satisfactory a confirmation of the
  remark which I collected from the Emperor’s conversation at St.
  Helena, that I cannot refrain from transcribing it.

  The passage is as follows:—

  “It was Napoleon’s desire to create anew the Italian Nation, and to
  re-unite the Venetians, Milanese, Piedmontese, Genoese, Tuscans,
  Parmesans, Modenese, Romans, Neapolitans, Sicilians, and Sardinians,
  in one independent nation, bounded by the Alps and the Adriatic, the
  Ionian, and the Mediterranean seas: such was the immortal trophy he
  was raising to his glory! This great and powerful kingdom would have
  been, by land, a check to the House of Austria; whilst, by sea, its
  fleets, combined with those of Toulon, would have ruled the
  Mediterranean, and protected the old course of trade to India, by the
  Red Sea and Suez. Rome, the capital of this state, was the eternal
  city; covered by the three barriers of the Alps, the Po, and the
  Apennines; nearer than any other to the three great Islands. But
  Napoleon had many obstacles to surmount. He said, at the Consultum of
  Lyons, _It will take me twenty years to re-establish the Italian
  Nation_.

  “There were three impediments to this grand design; first, the
  possessions of Foreign Powers in Italy; secondly, the influence of
  locality; and, thirdly, the residence of the Popes at Rome.

  “Scarcely ten years had elapsed, from the date of the _Consultum_ of
  Lyons, before the first obstacle was entirely removed. Foreign Powers
  no longer possessed any portion of Italy; which was entirely under the
  immediate influence of the Emperor. The destruction of the Republic of
  Venice, the deposition of the King of Sardinia and of the Grand Duke
  of Tuscany, the annexation of Saint Peter’s patrimony to the Empire,
  had set aside the second obstacle. As founders, who have to transform
  several guns of small calibre into one forty-eight pounder, first
  throw them all into the furnace to reduce them to a state of fusion,
  so the small States had been united to Austria and France, that they
  might be reduced to an elementary state, freed from their old
  recollections and pretensions, and thus prepared for re-casting. The
  Venetians having been annexed to the Austrian Monarchy, had for
  several years experienced the bitterness of subjection to the Germans.
  When these people should have been restored to an Italian Government,
  they would have cared little whether their city was to be the capital
  of Italy, or whether their government was to be more or less
  aristocratic. A similar change would have taken place in Piedmont,
  Genoa, and Rome, which had all been disorganized by the change of the
  French Empire.

  “There were now no Venetians, Piedmontese, or Tuscans: the inhabitants
  of the whole Peninsula were only Italians. All was prepared for
  forming the great Italian Nation. The Grand Duchy of Berg was vacant
  for the dynasty which, for the time, occupied the throne of Naples.
  The Emperor impatiently awaited the birth of a second son, to crown
  him King of Italy; and to proclaim the independence of the beautiful
  Peninsula, under the Regency of Prince Eugene.”

“All the South of Europe, therefore, would soon have been rendered
compact in point of locality, views, opinions, sentiments, and
interests. In this state of things, what would have been the weight of
all the nations of the north? What human efforts could have broken
through so strong a barrier?

“The concentration of the Germans must have been effected more
gradually; and therefore I had done no more than simplify their
monstrous complication. Not that they were unprepared for
concentralization; on the contrary, they were too well prepared for it,
and they might have blindly risen in re-action against us, before they
had comprehended our designs. How happens it that no German Prince has
yet formed a just notion of the spirit of his nation, and turned it to
good account? Certainly, if heaven had made me a Prince of Germany,
amidst the many critical events of our times, I should, infallibly, have
governed the thirty millions of Germans united; and, from what I know of
them, I think I may venture to affirm that, if they had once elected and
proclaimed me, they would not have forsaken me, and I should never have
been at St. Helena.”

Then, after some melancholy details and comparisons, he thus resumed:
“At all events, this concentration will be brought about, sooner or
later, by the very force of events. The impulse is given; and I think
that, since my fall and the destruction of my system, no grand
equilibrium can possibly be established in Europe, except by the
concentration and confederation of the principal nations. The sovereign
who, in the first great conflict, shall sincerely embrace the cause of
the people, will find himself at the head of all Europe, and may attempt
whatever he pleases.

“It will perhaps be asked why I did not suffer these ideas to transpire?
why I did not submit them to public discussion; since they would,
doubtless, have become popular, and popularity would have been an
immense re-inforcement to me? My answer is, that malevolence is ever
more active than good intention; that, at the present day, the power of
wit overrules good sense, and obscures at pleasure the most luminous
points; and that, to have submitted these important subjects to public
discussion would have been to consign them to the mercy of party-spirit,
passion, intrigue, and gossiping, while the infallible result would have
been discredit and opposition. I conceived, therefore, that secrecy was
the most advisable course. I surrounded myself with that halo of mystery
which pleases and interests the multitude; gives birth to speculations,
which occupy the public mind; and, finally, affords opportunities for
those sudden and brilliant disclosures, which exercise such important
influence. It was this very principle that accelerated my unfortunate
march to Moscow. Had I been more deliberate, I might have averted every
evil; but I could not delay and afford time for comment. With my career
already traced out, with my ideas formed for the future, it was
necessary that my movement and my success should seem, as it were,
supernatural.” The Emperor here adverted to the Russian expedition,
repeating many of the observations which I have already recorded
elsewhere. I now note down only what I conceive to be new.

“I will name another occasion,” said he, “on which accident was taken
for principle. I failed in my expedition against the Russians; and they,
therefore, consider themselves invincible. But can any thing be more
erroneous? Ask men of sense and reflection among them! Ask Alexander
himself, and let him recollect the opinions he entertained at the time!
Was I defeated by the efforts of the Russians? No! my failure must be
attributed to pure accident, to absolute fatality. First a capital was
burnt to the ground, in spite of its inhabitants and through foreign
intrigues, and in defiance of its inhabitants; then winter set in with
such unusual suddenness and severity that it was regarded as a kind of
phenomenon. To these disasters must be added a mass of false reports,
silly intrigues, treachery, stupidity, and, in short, many things that
will perhaps one day come to light, and which will excuse or justify the
two great errors I committed in diplomacy and war; namely, to have
undertaken such an enterprise, leaving on my flanks, which soon became
my rear, two cabinets of which I was not master, and two allied armies,
which, on the least check would become my enemies. But to come to a
conclusion, and to annul with a word every charge that can be brought
against me, I may say that this famous war, this bold enterprise, was
perfectly involuntary on my part. I did not wish to fight; neither did
Alexander;—but being once in presence, circumstances urged us on, and
fate accomplished the rest.”

After a few moments’ silence, and as if waking from a reverie, the
Emperor added:—“A Frenchman had in his hands the fate of the world! If
he had possessed judgment and spirit equal to the exalted situation in
which he was placed, if he had been a good Swede as he pretended to be,
he might have restored the glory and power of his adoptive country, have
retaken Finland, and arrived at St. Petersburgh before I reached Moscow.
But he was swayed by personal considerations, silly vanity, and all
sorts of mean passions. His head was turned, when he saw that he, an old
Jacobin, was courted and flattered by legitimates; when he found himself
holding political and friendly conferences face to face with an Emperor
of all the Russias, who took great pains to cajole him. It is affirmed
that hints were even thrown out to him of the possibility of his
obtaining the hand of one of the sisters of the Russian Emperor, by
divorcing his wife; and, in a letter addressed to him by a French
Prince, the writer remarked, with complacency, that Bearn was the cradle
of both their houses! _The house of Bernadotte_ forsooth!

“In his intoxication, he sacrificed both his new and his mother country,
his own glory, his true power, the cause of the people, and the welfare
of Europe! For this he will pay dearly! No sooner had he accomplished
all that was expected of him than he began to feel what awaited him. It
is said that he has repented of his conduct; but he has not yet expiated
it. He is now the only upstart sovereign in Europe. The Scandal cannot
remain unpunished; it would be too dangerous an example.”

THE EMPEROR HAS BUT LITTLE CONFIDENCE IN THE ISSUE OF
  1815.—THEMISTOCLES.—IN THE CRISIS OF 1814, NAPOLEON HIMSELF
  MOMENTARILY ENTERTAINED A THOUGHT OF RESTORING THE BOURBONS.—BARON
  FAIN’S MANUSCRIPT OF 1814.—THE ABDICATION OF FONTAINEBLEAU, &C.

12th.—The Emperor, adverting to his return from the Island of Elba and
his second fall at Waterloo, made some remarkable observations on both
these subjects. “It is very certain,” said he, “that, during the events
of 1815, I relinquished the anticipation of ultimate success: I lost my
first confidence. Perhaps I found that I was wearing beyond the time of
life at which fortune usually proves favourable; or, perhaps, in my own
eyes, in my own imagination, the spell that had hung over my miraculous
career was broken;—but, at all events, I felt that something was
wanting. Kind Fortune no longer followed my footsteps, and took pleasure
in lavishing her smiles upon me; she was now succeeded by rigid Fate,
who took ample revenge for the few favours which I obtained, as it were,
by force. It is a remarkable fact that every advantage I obtained at
this period was immediately succeeded by a reverse.

“I marched through France, and arrived in the capital amidst the
enthusiasm and universal acclamations of the people; but no sooner had I
reached Paris than, by a sort of magic, and without any adequate motive,
all around suddenly shrank from me and grew cold.

“I had adduced plausible reasons for obtaining a sincere reconciliation
with Austria, whither I had despatched agents, more or less avowed.[8]
But Murat was there with his fatal enterprise. It was concluded, at
Vienna that he was acting under my orders; and, measuring me by their
own scale, they regarded my whole conduct as a complication of artifice,
and determined to overreach me by counter-intrigue.

Footnote 8:

  Among others, Baron Stassard, in whose well known fidelity Napoleon
  reposed such confidence, that he sent him to the Congress of Vienna,
  to negotiate for the maintenance of the peace of Paris. But the Baron
  was unfortunately prevented from proceeding farther than Lintz; the
  most furious and inveterate in the Allied Cabinets having adopted the
  precaution of securing the absolute prohibition of all communication
  with Napoleon. It was, however, indirectly intimated to Baron
  Stassard, that if, before the commencement of hostilities, the Emperor
  chose to abdicate in favour of his son, Austria would accede to that
  condition, provided Napoleon would surrender himself into the hands of
  his father-in-law, who would again guarantee to him the sovereignty of
  the Isle of Elba, or any analogous sovereignty.

“The opening of my campaign was well managed and proved most successful.
I should have surprised the enemy in detail; had not a deserter from
among our generals given him timely notice of my plans.

“I gained the brilliant victory of Ligni; but my lieutenant robbed me of
its fruits. Finally, I triumphed even at Waterloo, and was immediately
hurled into the abyss. Yet I must confess that all these strokes of fate
distressed me more than they surprised me. I felt the presentiment of an
unfortunate result. Not that this in any way influenced my
determinations and measures; but the foreboding certainly haunted my
mind.”

That such was really Napoleon’s state of feeling at the period here
alluded to is evident from the following anecdote, which is so very
remarkable that I cannot forbear presenting it to the reader. When on
the banks of the Sambre, the Emperor early one morning approached a
bivouac fire, accompanied only by his aide-de-camp on duty (General
C—--); some potatoes were boiling on the fire, and the Emperor asked for
one, and began to eat it. Then, with a meditative and somewhat
melancholy expression, he uttered the following broken sentences:—“After
all, it is good, it is endurable.... Man may live in any place, and in
any way.... The moment perhaps is not far distant.... Themistocles!...”
The aide-de-camp above mentioned, who himself related this circumstance
to me, since my return to Europe, observed that, had the Emperor been
successful, these words would have passed away without leaving any
impression on him; but that, after the catastrophe, and particularly
after reading the celebrated letter to the Prince Regent, he had been
struck with the recollection of the bivouac of the Sambre; and
Napoleon’s manner, tone, and expression, had since so haunted his mind,
that he could never banish the circumstance from his memory.

It is a mistake to suppose that Napoleon was on all occasions inspired
by that internal confidence which his acts and decisions seemed to
denote. When he quitted the Tuileries, in January 1814, to enter upon
his immortal but unfortunate campaign in the environs of Paris, his mind
was depressed by gloomy apprehensions:—and a circumstance that bears
evidence of his penetration and foresight is that, at the period in
question, he felt convinced of what the majority of those about him were
far from suspecting;—namely, that if he fell, it would be by the
Bourbons. This idea he communicated to a few of his particular friends,
who vainly endeavoured to rouse his confidence by representing that the
Bourbons were forgotten, that they were wholly unknown to the present
generation:—“There is the real danger,” was his invariable reply. Thus,
immediately after his eloquent and impressive harangue to the officers
of the national guard, in which among other things he said:—“You elected
me, I am your work, and it is for you to defend me;” and which he
concluded by presenting to them the Empress and the King of Rome,
saying, “I go to oppose the enemy, and I consign to your care all that I
hold most dear:”—immediately after delivering this address, when on the
point of quitting the Tuileries, he foresaw at that decisive moment the
treachery and perfidy that awaited him, and he resolved to secure the
person of him who proved to be the main-spring of the plot, by which his
overthrow was effected. He was prevented from executing his intention
only by representations, and it may even be said, offers of personal
responsibility, on the part of some of his Ministers, who assured him
that the individual suspected had more reason than any one else to dread
the return of the Bourbons. Napoleon yielded; at the same time
emphatically expressing fears that he might have cause to regret his
forbearance!...

The following circumstance, which is but little known, is important,
since it proves how much, in the height of the crisis. Napoleon’s
thoughts were directed towards the Bourbons. After the check sustained
at Brienne, the evacuation of Troyes, the forced retreat on the Seine,
and the degrading conditions which were transmitted from Chatillon, but
which were so generously rejected, the Emperor, who was closeted with
one of his friends, overpowered at sight of the miseries that were
impending on France, suddenly rose from his chair, exclaiming with
warmth:—“Perhaps I still possess the means of saving France.... What if
I were myself to recal the Bourbons! The Allies would then be compelled
to arrest their course, under pain of being overwhelmed with disgrace
and detected in their duplicity; under pain of being forced to
acknowledge that their designs were directed against our territory
rather than against my person. I should sacrifice all to the country. I
should become the mediator between the French people and the Bourbons. I
should oblige the latter to accede to the national laws, and to swear
fidelity to the existing compact: my glory and name would be a guarantee
to the French people. As for me, I have reigned long enough. My career
is filled with acts of glory; and this last will not be esteemed the
least. I shall rise the higher by descending thus far....” Then, after a
pause of some moments, he added:—“But can a repulsed dynasty ever
forgive?... Can it ever forget?... Can the Bourbons be trusted?... May
not Fox be right in his famous maxim respecting restorations?...”

Overcome by grief and anxiety, he threw himself on his couch, and was
shortly after roused to be made acquainted with the march of the flank
of Blucher’s corps, on which he had for some time been secretly keeping
watch. He rose to put into action that new spring of resources, energy,
and glory, which will for ever consecrate the names of Champ-Aubert,
Montmirail, Chateau-Thierry, Vaux-Champ, Nangis, Montereau, Craon, &c.
These marvellous successes dismayed Alexander and the English, and
suggested to them the expediency of treating: they might indeed have
entirely changed the face of affairs, had not Napoleon’s designs been
thwarted by accidents beyond the reach of human calculation. For
example, the important orders which did not reach the Viceroy, the
defection of Murat, the indolence and negligence of certain Chiefs, and
finally, even the successful movements of the French, which, by
separating the Emperor of Austria from the other Allied Sovereigns, left
the latter entirely free to plan the abdication of Fontainebleau, an
event which will ever be celebrated in the history of our destiny and
our moral character.

Philosophic thinkers, painters of the human heart, turn your eyes to
Fontainebleau, and contemplate the fall of the greatest of monarchs!
Observe how the retinue by which the unfortunate hero was
surrounded,—those whom he had loaded with favours, honours, and
riches,—at the first frown of fortune, forsook, betrayed, and even
sought to insult him!... Mark how the first among them in rank, in
favour, in confidence—he whom the great Prince had vainly sought to
inspire with exalted sentiment, by treating him as his companion and his
friend,—mark how this man degraded himself to the level of the Mameluke,
whose native manners rendered him perhaps more excusable, and who
thought it perfectly natural to forsake his fallen master.

At Fontainebleau, the crisis being accomplished, and while Napoleon was
earnestly engaged, this favourite companion presented himself before him
to solicit permission to proceed to Paris, only, as he said, for a short
time, and for the purpose of settling some business, after which, he
declared that he should return to the Emperor, never again to leave him.
But Napoleon could read the secrets of the human mind, and that person
had scarcely withdrawn, when the Emperor, breaking from the subject on
which he was engaged, said to him with whom he had been
conversing:—“There he goes to seal his own degradation; and, in spite of
all his protestations, he will never come back again,“ He spoke truly;
the deserter hastened to greet the first rays of the rising sun; and no
sooner had it shone upon him than he renounced his benefactor, his
friend, and master!... In speaking of the Emperor, he was even known to
use the expression _that man_! And yet Napoleon so readily forgave human
weakness, and was so superior to every feeling of rancour and
resentment, that, on his return from Elba, he expressed regret at not
seeing the individual who had acted so treacherous a part, adding, with
a smile:—“The rogue is afraid of me, I suppose; but he has no reason to
be so. The only punishment I should have inflicted on him would have
been to require him to appear before me in his new costume. They tell me
he looks even uglier than usual.“

And how many instances of private turpitude might not be mentioned! I
myself can attest that an important personage, who had been most
remarkable for his base conduct on returning from Fontainebleau,
appeared one of the most forward at the Tuileries, on the 20th of March.
He appeared very much disconcerted at the accidental or intended
solitude in which he was left by all the rest. A witness of his late
misconduct, burying the recollection of past troubles in the present
joy, hastened to him and relieved him from his embarrassment. Such
generosity cost little at that moment.

I refer to the Manuscript of 1814, for a picture of these mortifying
events.[9] The reader may there learn—But no, he will learn nothing
new—In all circumstances, at all times, and in all countries, men, and
particularly courtiers, are ever the same; and it must be recollected
that, by this time, Napoleon’s camp had become a Court.—Let not these
men say that their conduct was dictated by regard for the welfare and
interest of their country. The thought of securing the undisturbed
enjoyment of the wealth and honours they had acquired superseded in
their minds every patriotic consideration. But history will be just. I
say history, for the bulk of the present generation cannot even claim
this sad honour. Where was our indignation? Where was our reprobation
authentically and solemnly pronounced?... And let it be understood that
this is a point wholly unconnected with political considerations. The
question is not what cause these men supported: but merely, what moral
principle they professed. But it must not be supposed that discontented
misanthropy would lead me to draw a picture discouraging to all hearts,
and to conclude with the proscription of all mankind. By no means:—I am
well aware that the moment of great trials is that of great extremes;
and that, amidst the basest passions, the most brilliant heroism and
noble virtue shine conspicuous. Therefore, honoured be those veteran
bands, whose bitter tears attested their sincere sorrow! Honoured be
those innumerable subaltern officers to whom a word would have been the
signal for shedding every drop of their blood! Honoured be the generous
peasantry, who presented to our troops their last morsel of bread; and,
disregarding their own privations, parted with all, to aid the brave
defenders of their country! Honoured be those generous sentiments that
were expressed by the citizens of every class, sex, and age! If, on the
one side, the heart is roused to indignation, it finds a delicious
source of gratification on the other.

Footnote 9:

  Baron Fain, first cabinet secretary to Napoleon, has published a
  volume entitled, _The Manuscript of 1814_. This work presents an
  animated and interesting detail of the important but imperfectly known
  events of the period, and in particular of the short but immortal
  campaign of 1814. It is an episode of miracles, in which Napoleon
  throughout appears supernatural in the resources of genius, the energy
  of mind, the celerity of motion, the steadiness of views, and the
  sublimity of courage, which he there evinced. Nothing can be compared
  with the prodigies he performed, except indeed the indefatigable
  ardour of a handful of brave men, who, as if strangers to the wants of
  nature, when deprived of food and rest, seemed to multiply before the
  enemy’s legions, were incessantly engaged, and always victorious.

  Baron Fain has presented us with a record of national glory, and he is
  justly entitled to the gratitude of his countrymen. In his picture of
  war, confusion and trouble, the characteristic traits of the mind and
  heart of Napoleon frequently shine forth with lustre. To me, who have
  especially devoted my attention to these latter objects, it is
  peculiarly gratifying, while at the same time, it must be curious to
  all readers to trace the correspondence between details recorded by
  two men, total strangers to each other, and alluding to periods and
  circumstances wholly distinct.

At St. Helena, the Emperor dictated an account of the events of
Fontainebleau, and his removal to the Island of Elba; but my memory does
not enable me to quote any of the facts thus detailed. I took no notes
of them, because, with a view of abridging my own labour, I laid down
the rule of passing over those subjects that were dictated to others,
being assured that they would be faithfully recorded. I shall,
therefore, merely subjoin a few particulars which are collected from
Napoleon’s conversations, or other authentic sources.

When the disasters of 1814 were apparent, when the danger was imminent,
particularly after the entrance of the Allies into Paris, many of the
French Generals began to waver. Those in whom selfishness prevailed over
patriotism; those who would rather retire from the fatigues of war, than
obey the dictates of duty, honour and glory; urged on the catastrophe,
instead of seeking to avert it. The most distinguished Chiefs ventured
to advise the abdication, and declared it to be indispensable. Some even
went so far as to hint to the Emperor that they could not answer for the
consequences of the dissatisfaction and indignation which the soldiers
manifested towards him; while, on the contrary, as Napoleon himself
said, “such was the attachment of the troops, and the devotedness of the
officers, that, if I had made known the machinations that were plotting,
I certainly should have endangered those who were guilty of such
misrepresentation. A single word from me would have sacrificed them.”
Napoleon reviewed the troops: their acclamations were enthusiastic and
general. It appeared as though adversity served only to render the
Emperor the more dear to them, for their attachment was never so
decidedly expressed. “It was impossible that it could be otherwise,”
said Napoleon, “such was the identity of these brave men with me, and
such our mutual sympathy, I never entertained a doubt of their
attachment.”

In this extremity, Napoleon profoundly reflected on what course it was
advisable for him to pursue. He yet possessed forty or fifty thousand
troops, the best and most devoted in the world; he might, without risk,
have overawed or dismissed the faithless Generals. In this state of
things, three different measures, by turns, presented themselves to his
mind.

The first was to return to Paris; for he imagined that no General on
earth would be bold enough to give him battle with that immense capital
in his rear. “At my command,” said the Emperor, “the whole population
would have risen. I should suddenly have found my forces recruited, by
the addition of one or two hundred thousand men. But the Allies, on
retiring, might have burnt the capital; and this disaster would have
been accounted my work. It is true, the burning of Paris might have
proved in reality the salvation of France, as the burning of Moscow was
the salvation of Russia; but such sacrifices can only be made by the
parties interested.”

The second idea which suggested itself to the Emperor’s mind was to
proceed to Italy, to form a junction with the Viceroy. “But this,” said
Napoleon, “would have been a desperate course, without the chance of
obtaining an adequate result. It would have removed the theatre of
conflict to too remote a point. Public enthusiasm would have had time to
subside; and we should no longer have been fighting in France, on whose
sacred soil alone we could hope to work the prodigies that had become
indispensable.”

Neither of these two measures would have been practicable. Only the
third course, therefore, remained, and this was, to continue on the
defensive, to dispute every foot of ground, and to maintain the war
until new chances should arise. The stupor, which the presence of the
invaders had produced, would soon be dispelled; the miseries they
created would soon render them the objects of execration: the national
enthusiasm would revive; and the Allies would find their graves in the
land which they had presumed to violate. But this must necessarily have
been the work of time; in a word, success was doubtful, or, at least,
remote; while the sufferings of the people were certain, immediate, and
incalculable. The noble mind of Napoleon was moved; and he resolved to
abdicate.

Meanwhile, he despatched to the Emperor Alexander a deputation of
Marshals, among whom was the Duke of Ragusa, one of those to whom he was
most fondly attached. The Deputation was instructed to propose the
abdication of Napoleon, in favour of his son. The Emperor thus hoped to
save France, to secure her independence and the duration of her existing
institutions. The Emperor Alexander, who had several days before
publicly declared that he would not treat either with Napoleon or any of
the members of his family, nevertheless discussed the subject
contradictorily with that party of the Senate who proposed the
abdication. The Marshals spoke vehemently, and in the name of the whole
army. Alexander’s determination was shaken, and the party favourable to
the Regency seemed likely to prevail, when intelligence arrived of the
defection of the Duke of Ragusa; and this circumstance confirmed
Alexander in his previous resolution. The event came upon him like a ray
of light: the army, then, is not unanimous, thought he! From that
moment, setting aside all reserve, he declared himself to be inflexible.
In this state of things, Napoleon was surrounded, urged, and harassed to
sign his positive and unconditional abdication. He yielded, after a
great internal struggle, and dictated the act of abdication, in the
following terms:—

“The Allied Powers having proclaimed that the Emperor Napoleon is the
only obstacle to the re-establishment of the peace of Europe, the
Emperor, faithful to his oath, renounces for himself and his heirs, the
thrones of France and Italy, and declares that there is no sacrifice,
even that of life, which he is not ready to make for the interests of
France.”

This declaration, which the Allies were far from expecting in so
absolute a form, smoothed every difficulty, and the Marshals returned
with what is called the treaty of Fontainebleau, which I shall presently
insert.

I find in Baron Fain’s _Manuscript of 1814_, a complete explanation of
certain remarks made by the Emperor, which I noted down at the time,
without exactly comprehending their meaning. In a former part of this
Journal, the Emperor, alluding to the treaty of Fontainebleau, says, “I
will have nothing to do with that treaty; I disclaim it. Far from being
proud of it, I blush for it. It was discussed for me, and against my
will,” &c. And, on another occasion, he says, “When the history of the
events of Fontainebleau comes to be known, it will afford ample room for
surprise.” The Manuscript of 1814 proves that Napoleon had, indeed,
nothing to do with the treaty of Fontainebleau. The utmost exertions
were employed to prevail on him to sign the treaty; and he was, at
length, only influenced by the public considerations that were adduced
in support of it. He thought it both degrading and useless to sign the
treaty. Having survived his greatness, he wished thenceforth to live as
a private individual; and he was mortified to reflect that the vast
sacrifice which had been made, for the peace of the world, should be
mingled with pecuniary arrangements. “Of what use is a treaty,” said he,
“since they will not settle the interests of France with me? If only my
personal interests are concerned, there is no need of a treaty. I am
conquered; I yield to the fate of arms. All I ask is that I may not be
accounted a prisoner of war: and for that a mere cartel is sufficient!”

Every endeavour to turn his thoughts to his personal situation, his
existence, and future wants, proved unavailing. To all such suggestions,
he energetically replied, “What matters it? A horse and a crown a day
are all that I want.”

I, for my own part, can bear witness that the Emperor infinitely
regretted having ratified the treaty of Fontainebleau; and this was not
the only decision of the period which weighed heavily on his mind. He
also very much regretted having yielded, when in his position at St.
Dizier and Doulevant, to the various representations and suggestions by
which he was assailed, and which brought him back against his
inclination upon Paris. “Here I wanted firmness,” said he; “I should
have followed up my intention of advancing to the Rhine, collecting
reinforcements from all the garrisons on my way, and exciting the
peasantry to rise. By this means, I should soon have possessed an
immense army. Murat would immediately have rejoined me; and he and the
Viceroy would have made me master of Vienna, if the Allies had presumed
to deprive me of Paris. But no: the enemy would have shrunk from the
dangers with which he would have been surrounded. The Allied Sovereigns
would have regarded it as a favour to have been permitted to retire; and
then the volcano of foreigners against us would have been completely
extinguished. Peace would have been concluded and sincerely maintained;
for all were exhausted; all had wounds to heal!... Abroad, war could no
longer have been thought of; and at home, such a result must have had
the effect of destroying all illusion, frustrating every evil design,
and permanently blending the opinions, views, and interests of all
parties. I should once more have seated myself triumphantly on the
throne, surrounded by my invincible bands. The heroic and faithful
portion of the people would have harmonized those who had wavered; and
the men who had shewn themselves so eager for repose might have enjoyed
it. A new generation of chiefs would have remoulded our character. Every
effort would have been directed to the internal welfare of the country;
and France would have been happy!”

When speaking of the confusion created in Paris, by the approach of the
Allies; the dejection, to use no stronger term, that was evinced by the
upper classes; the good spirit and enthusiasm manifested by the great
body of the people, who were ready to fight, if they could have procured
arms,—I observed that the departure of the Empress had produced a fatal
effect on the public mind. I mentioned, as a singular circumstance, that
the young King of Rome, contrary to custom, obstinately refused to quit
the palace: he wept bitterly, and it was found necessary to carry him
away by force. I also added that it was universally reported that the
Empress wished to remain, and that the Council was inclined to second
her wishes, until precise orders were received from the Emperor,
directing her to quit Paris, in case of urgent danger on the part of the
enemy. “Yes,” said the Emperor, “and those orders were very necessary.
The Empress was young and totally inexperienced. Had she been capable of
personal decision, my directions would have been quite the contrary.
Paris then would have been her proper post. But I foresaw the intrigues
of which she would be the object; and I wished to prevent at Paris what
subsequently occurred at Orleans. There the men who were planning the
Regency, in the expectation of ruling under the Empress, prevented her
from joining me. What fatal consequences were thus produced! Would to
Heaven that I had also despatched timely orders, directing her to quit
Orleans!”

It is certain that at Fontainebleau Napoleon was, almost at one and the
same moment, the victim of every kind of mental distress with which man
can possibly be assailed. Subdued by defection and not by force of arms,
he felt all that could rouse the indignation of a lofty mind, or break
an affectionate heart. His friends forsook him; his servants betrayed
him; one surrendered his army; another his treasure. The men whom he had
reared, maintained and loaded with favours, were those who wrought his
overthrow. The members of the senate, who, only the day before, had
supplied him profusely with conscripts to oppose the enemy, scrupled not
to become the instruments of that very enemy. Under the impulse of
foreign bayonets, they imputed to him as a crime that which was their
own work; and basely broke the idol which they had themselves created,
and so servilely worshipped. What a depth of disgrace and
degradation!... Finally (and this stroke Napoleon felt more severely
than all the rest), his wife and child were carried away from him; and,
in defiance of treaties and laws, in opposition to all moral principle,
he was never allowed to see them more!...

It appears that Napoleon, oppressed by this weight of affliction,
surrounded by this odious turpitude, in his utter contempt of human
nature, and all things connected with this world, formed the resolution
of putting an end to his life. A letter has been preserved, written in
his own hand to the Empress, in which he says that the moment has
arrived when she must prepare her mind for every thing; that all is
possible, _even the death of the Emperor_. This was, doubtless, an
allusion to the mysterious event of the night of the 12th of April,
which was wrapt in profound secrecy. The Manuscript of 1814, however,
contains some particulars relative to this occurrence, which, if they be
correct, will not leave the furious enemies of Napoleon even the
satisfaction of repeating the stupid and vulgar remark, _that he had not
courage to die_; ... for, according to the Manuscript, it appears, on
the contrary, that _he could not die_! This is not the least
extraordinary event in Napoleon’s career. His remark, _Heaven has
ordained that I shall live!_ and the calm and noble resignation, which
from that moment succeeded, appear truly sublime.

Napoleon’s celebrated farewell address to his troops, and his last
embrace of those eagles which he had immortalized, are well known. A
Prussian diplomatist, who was present, has assured me that the scene
produced an impression on him which time can never obliterate. He added
that the English Commissioner, who stood near him, and who had
previously been an inveterate enemy of Napoleon’s, was so deeply moved
that he shed tears.

Such were the sentiments of respect and veneration naturally inspired by
Napoleon that, in spite of the danger and inconvenience occasioned by
his presence in France, no one presumed to hasten his departure; and he
was allowed full time to make all the arrangements that he wished.

The treaty of abdication is dated the 11th of April, and Napoleon did
not quit Fontainebleau until the 20th, nine days after. Throughout the
first part of his journey, he was the object of universal respect, and
often of the warmest and most affectionate interest.[10]

Footnote 10:

  The Emperor departed from Fontainebleau on the 20th of April, 1814,
  escorted by a party of horse grenadiers. Count Bertrand was with him
  in the carriage.

  On the evening of the 20th, he reached Briare.

  On the 21st, he arrived at Nevers.

  On the 22nd, at Rouanne.

  On the 23rd, at Lyons.

  On the 24th, at Montelimart.

  On the 25th, at Orgon.

  On the 26th, he slept near Luc.

  On the 27th, at Frejus.

  On the 28th, at eight in the evening, he embarked on board the English
  Frigate, _The Undaunted_, commanded by Captain Usher.

Hitherto, foreigners seemed to have formed no idea of the spirit that
prevailed in France, or of the real feelings of the people with regard
to the Emperor. However, it was deemed prudent to arrange matters so
that Napoleon should reach Lyons in the night; or, I rather believe, it
was intended to prevent his entering that city at all. I received the
following particulars from an English gentleman, one of those who had
been long detained in France, and who happened, at the period in
question, to be residing at Lyons. My informant and the Austrian General
went out in disguise, and mingled with the crowd that had assembled to
see the dethroned monarch pass by. They expected to be much amused with
the imprecations of which, they concluded, he would be the object. But,
as soon as the Emperor appeared, deep silence prevailed among the
multitude; and an old woman, to all appearance above the common class,
habited in deep mourning, and with a countenance full of enthusiasm,
rushed forward to the door of the Emperor’s carriage. “Sire,” said she,
with an air of solemnity, “may the blessing of Heaven attend you!
Endeavour to make yourself happy. They tear you from us; but our hearts
are with you wheresoever you go.” The Austrian General, quite
disconcerted, said to his companion, “Let us begone; I have no patience
with this old mad woman. The people have not common sense.”

A little beyond Lyons, the General-in-chief of the army of the East
appeared on the road; and Napoleon, alighting from his carriage, walked
with him for a considerable way. When the General had taken his leave,
one of the allied Commissioners ventured to express his surprise that
the Emperor should have treated him with such an appearance of
friendship and confidence. “Why should I not?” inquired Napoleon.—“Your
Majesty is, perhaps, not aware of his conduct?“—“What has he
done?“—“Sire, he entered into an understanding with us several weeks
ago.” “It was even so,” said the Emperor, “he to whom I had entrusted
the defence of France on this point, sacrificed and betrayed the
country.” After many complaints of the perfidy of men in whom he had
reposed confidence, he concluded by saying: “The Marshal was no longer
the soldier. His early courage and virtues had raised him above the
multitude; but honours, dignities, and fortune, again reduced him to the
common level. The conqueror of Castiglione might have left behind him a
name dear to his country. But France will execrate the memory of the
traitor of Lyons, and all who acted as he did, unless, indeed, their
future services shall make amends for their past wrongs.”

This circumstance dictated the famous proclamation which the Emperor
issued on his return. “Frenchmen,” said he, “the defection of the Duke
of Castiglione left Lyons defenceless and at the mercy of the enemy. The
army, the command of which I had entrusted to that Chief, was, from the
number of its battalions, and the courage and patriotism of its troops,
capable of defeating the corps of the Austrian army opposed to it, and
advancing on the rear of the left flank of the enemy’s force that
threatened Paris. The victories of Champ-Aubert, Montmirail,
Chateau-Thierry, Vaux-Champ, Mormans, Montereau, Craon, Rheims,
Arcis-sur-Aube, and St. Dizier; the rising of the brave peasantry of
Lorraine, Champagne, Alsace, the Franche-Comte, and Burgundy; the
position which I had taken up in the rear of the enemy, intercepting his
magazines, parks of reserve, convoys, and equipages—all had thrown the
invading forces into a desperate situation. The French people never had
the prospect of becoming more powerful. The enemy’s picked corps would
have been irretrievably lost, and would have found their graves in those
plains which they so mercilessly ravaged, when the treason of the Duke
of Ragusa delivered up the capital, and disorganized the army. The
unlooked-for conduct of these two generals, who at once betrayed their
country, their Prince, and their benefactor, changed the fate of the
war. Such was the disastrous situation of the enemy, after the affair
which took place before Paris, that he was absolutely destitute of
ammunition, by being separated from his parks of reserve,” &c.[11]

Footnote 11:

  A friend of mine, travelling in Germany, assures me that he received
  from the commander of the Russian parks, several years after the
  event, a confirmation of the accuracy of the assertion contained in
  the above proclamation.

Napoleon was less favourably received in proportion as he approached
Provence; for there the machinations of his enemies had anticipated his
arrival. He had escaped the ambush of Maubreuil, but he could not avoid
that of Orgon; and this part of his dictated narrative is not the least
curious.

On his arrival at the place of embarkation, he found two vessels in
readiness to receive him; the one French and the other English. Napoleon
went on board the English frigate, observing that, he would never allow
it to be said that a Frenchman had conveyed him away.

Such is a brief account of the great event, the details of which,
dictated by Napoleon himself, will, as I have already mentioned,
hereafter be presented to the public. France was, at the time, inundated
with pamphlets on the subject, so full of falsehood and absurdity that
every honest and sensible man now blushes for having given credit to
them, or having had even the courage to read them.

The following is the treaty of Fontainebleau, to which I have already
alluded. It was carefully suppressed at the time it was drawn up, was
never published in the Moniteur, and remained long unknown. It is to be
found only in official collections, and even there the copies differ one
from another. I presume, therefore, that its insertion here will not be
deemed superfluous. It is intimately connected with the subject of which
I have just been treating, and many of its articles are still the topics
of daily conversation; and it must of course be satisfactory to be
enabled to discuss with a full knowledge of facts.

                        TREATY OF FONTAINEBLEAU.

“Article I. His Majesty the Emperor Napoleon renounces for himself, his
successors and descendants, as well as for all the members of his
family, all right of sovereignty and dominion over the French Empire,
and the kingdom of Italy, as well as over every other country.

“II. Their Majesties the Emperor Napoleon and Empress Maria Louisa,
shall retain their titles and rank, to be enjoyed during their lives.

“The mother, brothers, sisters, nephews and nieces of the Emperor, shall
also retain, wherever they may reside, the titles of Princes of the
Emperor’s family.

“III. The Isle of Elba, adopted by his Majesty the Emperor Napoleon as
his place of residence, shall form, during his life, a separate
principality, which shall be possessed by him in full sovereignty and
property.

“There shall be besides granted, in full property to the Emperor
Napoleon, an annual revenue of 2,000,000 francs in rent charge in the
great book of France, of which 1,000,000 shall be in reversion to the
Empress.

“IV. All the Powers promise to employ their good offices in causing to
be respected by the Barbary Powers the flag and territory of the Isle of
Elba; for which purpose, the relations with the Barbary Powers shall be
assimilated to those of France.

“V. The Duchies of Parma, Placentia, and Guastalla, shall be granted in
full property and sovereignty to her Majesty the Empress Maria Louisa.
They shall pass to the Prince her son, and to his descendants in the
right line. The Prince shall, henceforth, take the title of Prince of
Parma, Placentia, and Guastalla.

“VI. There shall be reserved in the territories renounced by this
treaty, to his Majesty the Emperor Napoleon, for himself and his family,
domains, rent charges, in the great book of France, producing an annual
revenue, clear of all deductions and charges, of 2,500,000 francs. These
domains, or rents, shall belong, in full property, to be disposed of as
they think fit, to the Princes and Princesses of the Emperor’s family,
and shall be divided amongst them in such manner that the revenues of
each shall be in the following proportion, viz:

                                                         _Francs._
     To Madame Mère                                        300,000
     To King Joseph and his Queen                          500,000
     To King Louis                                         200,000
     To the Queen Hortense and her children                400,000
     To King Jerome and his Queen                          500,000
     To the Princess Eliza                                 300,000
     To the Princess Paulina                               300,000

“The Princes and Princesses of the family of the Emperor Napoleon shall
moreover retain all the property, moveable and immoveable, of every kind
whatever, which they may possess by private right; together with the
rents which they hold also, as private individuals, in the great book of
France, or the Monte-Napoleone of Milan.

“VII. The annual pension of the Empress Josephine shall be reduced to
1,000,000 in domains, or inscriptions in the great book of France. She
shall continue to enjoy, in full property, all her private fortune,
moveable and immoveable, with power to dispose of it conformably to the
French Laws.

“VIII. There shall be granted to Prince Eugene, Viceroy of Italy, a
suitable establishment out of France.

“IX. The property which the Emperor Napoleon possesses in France, either
as extraordinary domain, or private domain, will remain attached to the
crown.

“Of the funds vested by the Emperor in the great book of France, in the
French bank, in the _Actions des Forêts_, or in any other manner, and
which his Majesty resigns to the Crown, there shall be reserved a
capital, not exceeding 2,000,000 of francs, to be expended in
gratuities, in favour of the individuals whose names shall be contained
in a list signed by the Emperor Napoleon, and which shall be transmitted
to the French Government.

“X.—All the crown diamonds shall remain in France.

“XI.—His Majesty the Emperor Napoleon shall return to the Treasury, and
to the other public funds, all the sums and effects that may have been
taken therefrom by his orders, with the exception of what has been
appropriated from the civil list.

“XII.—The debts of the household of his Majesty the Emperor Napoleon,
such as they may be at the time of the signature of the present treaty,
shall be immediately discharged out of the arrears due by the public
treasury to the civil list, according to a list which shall be signed by
a Commissioner appointed for that purpose.

“XIII.—The obligations of the Monte-Napoleone, of Milan, towards all
creditors, whether Frenchmen or foreigners, shall be punctually
fulfilled, without any change being made in this respect.

“XIV.—There shall be granted all the necessary passports for the free
passage of his Majesty the Emperor Napoleon, the Empress, the Princes
and Princesses, and all the persons of their suites, who wish to
accompany them, or fix their abode in foreign countries, as well as for
the passage of all the equipages, horses, and effects, belonging to
them.

“The Allied Powers will, in consequence, furnish officers and men for
escorts.

“XV.—The French Imperial Guard shall furnish a detachment of from 1200
to 1500 men, of all arms, to serve as an escort to the Emperor to St.
Tropez, the place of his embarkation.

“XVI.—A brig and the necessary transport vessels shall be fitted out to
convey to the place of his destination his Majesty the Emperor Napoleon
and his household. The brig shall belong, in full property, to his
Majesty the Emperor.

“XVII.—The Emperor shall be allowed to take with him, and retain, as his
guard, 400 men, volunteers and officers, as well as sub-officers and
soldiers.

“XVIII.—Every Frenchman who may follow the Emperor Napoleon, or his
family, shall be held to have forfeited his rights as a Frenchman,
should he not return to France within three years; at least, if he be
not included in the exceptions which the French Government reserves to
itself to grant, after the expiration of that period.

“XIX.—The Polish troops of all arms, in the service of France, shall be
at liberty to return home, and shall retain their arms and baggage, as a
testimony of their honourable services. The officers, sub-officers, and
soldiers, shall retain the decorations which have been granted to them,
and the pensions annexed to these decorations.

“XX.—The Allied Powers guarantee the execution of the articles of the
present treaty, and promise to obtain its adoption and guarantee by
France.

“XXI.—The present act shall be ratified, and the ratifications exchanged
at Paris within ten days, or sooner, if possible.

“Done at Paris, April 11, 1814.

     (_Signed_)    CAULAINCOURT, Duke of Vicenza;
                   Marshal MACDONALD, Duke of Tarento;
                   Marshal NEY, Duke of Elchingen;[12]
                   Prince METTERNICH.”

Footnote 12:

  It is worthy of remark that Marshal Ney does not here take the title
  of Prince of the Moskowa, from delicacy to the Emperor Alexander.

The same articles were signed separately and under the same date, by
Count Nesselrode on behalf of Russia, and Baron Hardenberg, on behalf of
Prussia.

                  DECLARATION OF ACCESSION IN THE NAME
                            OF LOUIS XVIII.

“The undersigned, Minister and Secretary of State for the department of
Foreign Affairs, having submitted to the King the inquiry which their
excellencies the plenipotentiaries of the Allied Powers have been
ordered by their sovereigns to make, relative to the treaty of the 11th
of April, to which the Provisional Government has acceded; his Majesty
has been pleased to authorize him in his name, to declare that the
clauses of the treaty, in so far as France is concerned, shall be
faithfully executed. The undersigned has consequently the honour to
communicate this declaration to their excellencies.

                             (_Signed_)      “The Prince of BENEVENTO.

“_Paris, May 31, 1814._”

The great European triumvirate dew up the treaty of Fontainebleau,
England acceded to it, a declaration made in the name of the King of
France promised its fulfilment in so far as he was concerned; and yet,
in spite of all these guarantees, it may be said that scarcely any of
the articles were observed. Certainly, it would be difficult to
conceive a more flagrant violation of good faith or a more absolute
compromise of the august signatures, which, it was to be expected,
each party would have been individually interested in preserving
unsullied and sacred. On these manifest violations was grounded the
moral justification of Napoleon’s enterprise in 1815. This opinion was
pretty generally adopted: it was advocated by the most distinguished
members of the English Parliament, those indefatigable supporters of
great principles, and by eminent statesmen of all countries. I may add
to these high authorities an individual opinion, which though somewhat
comically expressed, was not perhaps the less just. An Austrian
gentleman of rank, who was in Paris in 1815, and who was a furious
enemy of Napoleon’s, called on me just at the time when the Emperor’s
advance to the capital began to produce a great sensation. The
Austrian had already determined to set off, and he said to me, with
all possible gravity and sincerity: “Certainly, he hitherto occupied
the throne of France as an usurper: that’s unquestionable! But,” added
he, quibbling with himself diplomatically, “if he should now conquer
France, after all the monarchs of Europe have acknowledged him as a
sovereign, and have entitled him to go to war by not observing the
conditions they entered into, the case would be very different. And,
upon my word! ... for my own part at least ... I think in that case
... there might be some ground for maintaining that he has become
legitimate. At least, I think I should myself be inclined to consider
him so.”

LETTER FROM LORD CASTLEREAGH TO LORD BATHURST, RELATIVE TO THE TREATY
  OF FONTAINEBLEAU.

(_Paris, April 15, 1814._)

“... I shall, therefore, on the present occasion, confine myself to an
explanation of what has passed with respect to the future destination
and settlement of Napoleon and his family.

“Your Lordship has been already informed, by Lord Cathcart, of the Act
of Abdication which was signed by Buonaparte, on the 4th instant, and
of the assurance which was given him by the Emperor of Russia, and the
Provisional Government, of a pecuniary provision of six millions of
francs, with a safe asylum in the Island of Elba. The act in question
was deposited in the hands of M. de Caulaincourt, and Marshals Ney and
Macdonald, to be given up upon the due execution of engagements on the
part of the Allies, with respect to the proposed arrangement. These
persons were also authorized to agree to an armistice, and to settle
such a line of demarcation as might be satisfactory to the Allies,
and, in the mean time, prevent an unnecessary effusion of blood.

“On my arrival, I found this arrangement on the point of execution. A
convention had been discussed, and would have, in fact, been signed in
the course of the day by the Russian Minister, had not the approach of
the Allied Ministers been announced. The motives for accelerating the
immediate conclusion of this act, were the inconvenience, if not the
danger of Napoleon’s remaining at Fontainebleau, surrounded by troops,
who still, in a considerable degree, remained faithful to him; the
apprehension of intrigues in the army and in the capital; and the
importance attached, by a considerable portion of the officers, to
some arrangement favourable to their chief, in satisfaction of their
personal honour, before they left him.

“On the night of my arrival, the four Ministers had a conference with
the Prince de Benevento, on the subject of the proposed convention, to
which I stated my objections, desiring, at the same time, to be
understood as not urging them then, at the hazard of the internal
tranquillity of France, nor in impeachment of what was due, in good
faith, to the assurance given, under the exigency of the moment, by
Russia.

“The Prince de Benevento admitted the weight of many of the objections
stated, but declared that he did consider it, on the part of the
Provisional Government, as an object of the first importance, to avoid
any thing that might assume the character of a civil war, even for the
shortest time:—that he also found some such measure necessary, to make
the army pass over in a temper to be made use of. Upon these
declarations, and the Count de Nesselrode’s, that the Emperor, his
master, had found it necessary, in the absence of the Allies, to act
for the best, in their name as well as his own; I withdrew any further
opposition to the principle of the measure, suggesting only some
alterations in the details. I desired, however, to decline, on the
part of my Government, being more than an acceding party to the
treaty, and declared that the Act of Accession on the part of Great
Britain should not go beyond the territorial arrangements proposed in
the Treaty. My objections to our unnecessarily mixing in its forms,
especially in the recognition of Napoleon’s title under present
circumstances, were considered as perfectly reasonable: and I now
enclose the protocol and note, which will explain the extent to which
I have taken it upon me to give assurances on the part of my Court.

“At my suggestion, the recognition of the imperial titles in the
family were limited to their respective lives, for which there was a
precedent in the case of the King of Poland, when he became Elector of
Saxony.

“To the arrangement in favour of the Empress, I not only felt no
objection, but considered it due to the distinguished sacrifice of
domestic feelings which the Emperor of Austria was making to the cause
of Europe. _I should have wished to substitute another position in
lieu of Elba, for the seat of Napoleon’s retirement_; but none, having
the quality of security on which he insisted, seemed disposable, to
which equal objections did not occur; and I did not feel that I could
encourage the alternative which M. de Caulaincourt assured me
Buonaparte repeatedly mentioned, namely, an asylum in England.

“On the same night, the Allied Ministers had a conference with M. de
Caulaincourt, and the Marshals, at which I assisted. The treaty was
gone through, and agreed to with alterations: it has been since signed
and ratified, and Buonaparte will commence his movement towards the
south to-morrow, or the day following.

                                        (_Signed_)      “CASTLEREAGH.”

I thought it advisable to transcribe this letter; it throws a complete
light on the treaty of the 11th of April, of the particulars of which
I was ignorant, even when at St. Helena; and it presents two points to
which I particularly wish to call attention. It explains the
observation which fell from the Emperor, when I observed to him that
on an important occasion he seemed to have forgotten the
acknowledgement of his title by the English at Fontainebleau: when he
merely replied that it was done on purpose. Now, I learn from the
letter above quoted, that Lord Castlereagh studiously avoided the
recognition; but this is no impeachment of the scrupulous correctness
of Napoleon’s assertions.

The second point, which impartiality induces me to advert to is that
Lord Castlereagh, in his letter, speaks of the alternative offered by
Napoleon, to retire to England, in default of the cession of the Isle
of Elba. A few pages further on (Nov. 16), it will be found that
Napoleon, on the contrary, reproaches Lord Castlereagh with having
caused it to be insinuated to him that the adoption of England, as a
place of residence, would be the preferable course. These two
statements are certainly quite contradictory; but regard for
impartiality, as I before observed, has induced me to insert them. The
reader is, therefore, free to decide as he may think fit; for, as I
have often heard the Emperor say, one man’s word is as good as
another’s. For my own part, my choice is soon determined: I adopt the
words of Napoleon, in spite of the assertions of Lord Castlereagh. I
still bear in mind the erroneous declarations of Lord Whitworth, which
have been mentioned in the course of this Journal; the scandalous
assertions respecting Napoleon, made by Lord Castlereagh in Parliament
or in public assemblies; the garbled documents, on the authority of
which Murat’s deposition was decreed; and the numerous denials so
confidently expressed by Lord Bathurst in the House of Lords, the
falsehood of which was manifest to every individual at St. Helena, and
occasioned embarrassment even to Sir Hudson Lowe. I shall, therefore,
adhere to the opinion I have formed, until I find good reason to alter
it.

THE SWORD OF FREDERIC THE GREAT.—ON NAPOLEON’S MARRIAGE IT WAS HOPED
  THAT THE LION WOULD SLUMBER.—TORMENTING CONDUCT OF THE GOVERNOR.—OUR
  LOT ENVIABLE, EVEN AMIDST OUR MISERY.

13th.—This morning, when I was in the Emperor’s apartment, being
unemployed, I took a fancy to examine the large watch of Frederick the
Great, which hangs beside the chimney piece. This led the Emperor to
say, “I have been the possessor of glorious and valuable relics. I had
the sword of Frederick the Great; and the Spaniards presented to me,
at the Tuileries, the sword of Francis I. This was a high compliment,
and it must have cost them some sacrifice. The Turks and Persians have
also sent me arms, which were said to have belonged to Gengiskan,
Tamerlan, Nadir Shah, and I know not whom; but I attached importance
not to the fact, but to the intention.”

I expressed my astonishment that he had not endeavoured to keep
Frederick’s sword. “Why, I had my own,” said he, smiling, and gently
pinching my ear. He was right; I certainly made a very stupid
observation.

Afterwards, alluding to his second marriage, he said, that he had
intended to make choice of a Frenchwoman, and it would have been well
if he had done so. “Such a union would have been eminently national,”
he observed. “France was sufficiently great, and her Monarch
sufficiently powerful, to set aside every consideration of foreign
policy. Besides, among Sovereigns, the ties of blood are always made
to yield to political interests: hence what scandalous violations of
moral feeling are frequently exhibited to the world. Another objection
that may be urged against marriages of this kind is the admission of a
foreign Princess into state secrets, which she may be tempted to
betray; and, if a sovereign places trust in his connexions abroad, he
may find that he has set his foot on an abyss covered with flowers. In
short, it is absurd to suppose that such alliances can guarantee or
ensure any advantage.”

The announcement of the Emperor’s second marriage was a source of joy
to those prudent citizens who looked forward to the future.—A few days
after he had formed his determination, Napoleon said to one of his
Ministers (the Duke Decrès), in a moment of good humoured familiarity,
“Well; it appears that people are very much pleased with my intended
marriage.”—“Yes, Sire.”—“I suppose they expect that the lion will
slumber.”—“To say the truth, Sire, we are somewhat inclined to form
that expectation.”—“Well,” resumed Napoleon, after a few moments’
silence, “it is a mistake: and it is not the fault of the lion either.
Slumber would be as sweet to him as to any other. But do not you see
that while I am, to all appearance, _incessantly attacking_, I am,
nevertheless, always engaged in _self-defence_?”

The correctness of this assertion might have been doubted, while the
terrible conflict lasted; but the joy and indiscretion of the
triumphant party have sufficiently confirmed its truth. Some boasted
of having formed the determination of prosecuting the war until they
had accomplished the destruction of their enemy: others[13] have
unblushingly proclaimed that the plot for Napoleon’s overthrow was
hatched under the mask of alliance and friendship!

Footnote 13:

  _Austrian Observer_, 1817 or 1818.

During this and the two succeeding days, my attention was wholly
occupied by a contest which concerned me personally, and which has had
so much influence on my subsequent destiny, that I cannot pass it over
in silence. Ever since my residence at Longwood, I have had, as a
servant, a free mulatto, with whom I was very well satisfied; but Sir
Hudson Lowe suddenly took it into his head to remove him.

Prompted by the determination of tormenting us, by every means his
imagination could suggest, or (as many are inclined to believe,)
following up a perfidiously laid plan, he sent the English officer on
duty to inform me that he had conceived some doubts as to the
propriety of my being attended by a native of the Island; and that he
intended to remove my servant and send me one of his own choosing. My
answer was brief and positive; “The Governor,” said I, “has it in his
power to send away my servant, if he pleases; but he may spare himself
the trouble of sending me one of his choosing. I am daily learning
better and better how to dispense with the comforts of life. I can, if
necessary, wait on myself; this additional privation will be but
slightly felt, amidst the sufferings to which we are subjected.”

This circumstance occasioned the interchange of a vast number of
messages and notes. Sir Hudson Lowe wrote three or four times every
day to the officer on duty directing him to make various
communications to me. He observed that he did not understand my
scruples, and could not conceive why I should object to any servant he
might send me.—One of his selecting was as good as any other—The offer
of making the choice himself was merely a mark of attention, &c.

I was distressed to see the poor officer thus mercilessly sent to and
fro; and I was also heartily tired of the business myself. I therefore
begged that he would spare himself further trouble, by assuring the
Governor that to all his communications my reply must invariably be
the same; namely, that he might send away my servant if he pleased;
but that he must not think of obliging me to receive one of his
choosing; that he might place me in garrison by force, but never with
my own consent. While this correspondence was going forward, my
servant was sent for, interrogated, withdrawn from my service, then
sent back again, and at length finally withdrawn.

I rendered an account of the whole affair to the Emperor, who highly
applauded my determination of not admitting a spy among us. “But,”
said he, in the most engaging manner, “as this sacrifice has been made
for the interest of all, it is not proper that you alone should be the
sufferer. Send to Gentilini, my _valet de pied_, and let him wait on
you: he will be very happy to earn a few Napoleons in addition to his
wages: besides, tell him it is by my desire.” Gentilini, at first,
cheerfully undertook the duty; but, in the evening, the poor fellow
came to inform me that some one had told him, it was not proper for
one of the Emperor’s servants to attend on a private person!... The
Emperor had the goodness to send for Gentilini, and to repeat the
orders with his own mouth.

Thus the Governor daily persecutes us in every imaginable way. I do
not mention all the circumstances of this kind that are continually
occurring, not because habit has taught me to accommodate myself to
them, but, because the vexations that arise from mere ill-nature are
but trifles in comparison with the greater miseries which we have to
endure....

If I attempt to portray the horrors of my own situation alone, let it
be considered that I am exiled, and probably for ever, to a desert
rock, two thousand leagues from home, confined in a small prison,
beneath a sky, in a climate, and on a soil, totally different from
those of my native country. I am hastening to a premature grave, the
only probable conclusion of my misery. Bereft of my wife, children,
and friends, who, though they still live, may be said to be no longer
in the same world with me; shut out from all communication with
mankind, I deplore the recollection of family affections, and the
charms of friendship and society.... Certainly, there is no man,
whatever be his country or his opinions, but must commiserate my
lot.... But, in a moment, I can reverse the picture, and my situation
will appear an enviable one!...

Where is the heart that does not beat at the recollection of the
achievements of Alexander and Cæsar? Who can approach the relics of
Charlemagne without emotion? How happy should we be could we recal the
words, the accents, of Henry IV.! Thus, when oppressed by mental
dejection, when I feel the necessity of rousing my drooping spirits,
while my heart is overflowing with these sensations, and my mind
filled with these ideas, I exclaim: I possess all this, and more than
this! Here, I am not surrounded by mere illusions and historical
recollections; I am in actual contact with the living man who has
accomplished so many prodigies. Every day, every moment, I may
contemplate the features of him who, with a glance, ordered battles,
and decided the fate of empires. I may gaze on the brow that is
adorned with the laurels of Rivoli, Marengo, Austerlitz, Wagram, Jena,
and Friedland. I may presume to touch the hand that has wielded so
many sceptres, and distributed so many crowns; which seized the
enemy’s colours at Arcole and Lodi; and which, on a solemn occasion,
surrendered into the hands of an afflicted wife the only proofs of her
husband’s guilt. I hear the voice of him who, when addressing his
troops, in sight of the Egyptian pyramids, said, “My lads, from the
summits of those monuments, forty centuries look down upon us!” who,
halting and uncovering before a column of wounded Austrian soldiers,
exclaimed, “Honour and respect to the unfortunate brave.” I converse,
almost familiarly, with the Monarch who ruled Europe; whose pastime
was the embellishment of our cities, and the prosperity of our
provinces; who raised us to so high a rank in the estimation of
nations; and who wafted our glory to the skies!... I see him, I hear
him speak, I attend on him, and, perhaps, even help to console him!...
Can I then lay claim to pity? On the contrary, will not thousands envy
my lot? Who can boast of possessing so many sources of happiness, in
circumstances similar to ours?

NEW WORKS PLANNED BY THE EMPEROR.—REMARKS ON GREAT COMMANDERS;
  WAR, &C.—NAPOLEON’S OPINION’S ON VARIOUS
  INSTITUTIONS.—ADVOCATES.—CURATES.—MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS.

14th.—The Emperor sent for me about six o’clock. He informed me that
he had just been dictating a chapter on maritime rights. He spoke to
me of some other works he had in view. I ventured to remind him of the
fourteen paragraphs which he had already planned, and to which I
alluded on a former occasion. He seemed pleased that I had mentioned
the circumstance, and assured me that he would, some day, carry his
design into execution.

He read and corrected the valuable notes which he had dictated to the
Grand Marshal on ancient and modern warfare, the different plans of
composing and regulating armies, &c. He afterwards entered into
conversation, and, among other things, said, “No series of great
actions is the mere work of chance and fortune; it is always the
result of reflection and genius. Great men rarely fail in the most
perilous undertakings. Look at Alexander, Cæsar, Hannibal, the great
Gustavus, and others; they always succeeded. Were they great men
merely because they were fortunate? No; but because, being great men,
they possessed the art of commanding fortune. When we come to inquire
into the causes of their success, we are astonished to find that they
did every thing to obtain it.

“Alexander, when scarcely beyond the age of boyhood, with a mere
handful of brave troops, conquered a quarter of the globe. But was
this achievement the result of a mere accidental irruption, a sort of
unexpected deluge? No; all was profoundly calculated, boldly executed,
and prudently managed. Alexander proved himself at once a
distinguished warrior, politician, and legislator. Unfortunately, on
attaining the zenith of glory and success, his head was turned, and
his heart corrupted. He commenced his career with the mind of Trajan;
but he closed it with the heart of Nero, and the manners of
Heliogabalus.” The Emperor here described the campaigns of Alexander
in such a manner as enabled me to view the subject in a totally new
light.

Alluding to Cæsar, the Emperor remarked that he, the reverse of
Alexander, had commenced his career at an advanced period of life;
that his youth had been passed in indolence and vice; but that he had
ultimately evinced the most active and elevated mind. He thought him
one of the most amiable characters in history. “Cæsar,” observed he,
“overcame the Gauls, and the laws of his country. But his great
warlike achievements must not be attributed merely to chance and
fortune.” Here he analyzed the victories of Cæsar, as he had done
those of Alexander.

“Hannibal,” continued the Emperor, “is perhaps the most surprising
character of any, from the intrepidity, confidence, and grandeur,
evinced in all his enterprises. At the age of twenty-six, he conceived
what is scarcely conceivable, and executed what must have been looked
upon as impossible. Renouncing all communication with his country, he
marched through hostile or unknown nations, which he was obliged to
attack and subdue. He crossed the Pyrenees and the Alps, which were
presumed to be impassable, and descended upon Italy, sacrificing the
half of his army for the mere acquisition of his field of battle, the
mere right of fighting. He occupied and governed Italy for the space
of sixteen years, being several times within a hair’s breadth of
possessing himself of Rome, and only relinquished his prey when his
enemies, profiting by the lesson he had set them, went to attack the
Carthaginian territory. Can it be supposed that Hannibal’s glorious
career and achievements were the mere result of chance, and fortune’s
favours? Certainly, Hannibal must have been endowed with great vigour
of mind, and he must also have possessed a vast consciousness of his
own skill in the art of war, when, being interrogated by his youthful
conqueror, he hesitated not to place himself, though subdued, next in
rank to Alexander and Pyrrhus, whom he esteemed as the first of
warriors.

“All the great Captains of antiquity,” continued Napoleon, “and those
who in modern times have successfully trodden in their steps,
performed vast achievements, only by conforming with the rules and
principles of the art; that is to say, by correct combinations, and by
justly comparing the relation between means and consequences, efforts
and obstacles. They succeeded only by the strict observance of these
rules, whatever may have been the boldness of their enterprises, or
the extent of the advantages gained. They invariably practised war as
a science. Thus they have become our great models, and it is only by
closely imitating them that we can hope to approach them.

“My greatest successes have been ascribed merely to good fortune; and
my reverses will no doubt be imputed to my faults. But if I should
write an account of my campaigns, it will be seen that, in both cases,
my reason and faculties were exercised in conformity with principles.”

It is to be hoped that the Emperor will execute the idea of writing
his campaigns. How invaluable would be Napoleon’s Commentaries!

The Emperor analyzed the characters of Gustavus-Adolphus and Condé:
with the latter, he said, science seemed to be instinctive, nature
having created him with maturity of intellect. Turenne, on the
contrary, had perfected his talent by dint of pains and study. I
remarked that Turenne had formed no pupils, while Condé had left many
distinguished ones behind him. “That was the mere caprice of chance,”
replied the Emperor; “the contrary ought to have happened. But it is
not always in the master’s power to form good pupils; nature must lend
her aid: the seed must be sown in a fertile soil.” He made many
remarks on Eugène, Marlborough, Vendome, &c. Frederick the Great, he
said, was in all respects a super-excellent tactician, and possessed
the art of rendering his troops absolute machines. “How often,” said
he, “men’s characters prove to be totally different from what their
early actions indicate! Do they themselves know what they really are?
Frederick,” continued he, “at the commencement of his career, fled
from his own victory; and, certainly the whole of his subsequent
history proves him to have been the most intrepid, most tenacious, and
coolest of men.”

After dinner, the Emperor, who was pleased with the subject of the
dictations and conversation in which he had been engaged during the
morning, discoursed on the same topics for nearly an hour; discussing
in the most masterly and ingenious way a variety of points connected
with the art of war.

Alluding to the great difference between ancient and modern warfare,
he observed: “The invention of fire-arms has wrought a total change.
This great discovery operates entirely to the advantage of assailants,
though many moderns have maintained the contrary opinion. The
corporeal strength of the ancients,” added he, “was in harmony with
their offensive and defensive weapons; ours, on the other hand, are
entirely beyond our sphere.”

Should the Emperor leave behind him his thoughts on these points, they
will be truly invaluable. In course of the evening, he pronounced his
opinion on several military subjects; sometimes embracing the highest
questions, and sometimes descending into the minutest details.

He remarked that war frequently depended on accident, and that, though
a commander ought to be guided by general principles, yet he should
never lose sight of any thing that may enable him to profit by
accidental circumstances. The vulgar call good-fortune that which, on
the contrary, is produced by the calculations of genius.

In the present mode of military operations, he thought it advisable
that greater consistency should be given to the third rank of
infantry, or, that it should be suppressed; and he explained his
reasons for this.

He was of opinion that infantry charged by cavalry should fire from a
distance, instead of firing closely, according to the present
practice. He proved the advantage of this method.

He observed that infantry and cavalry left to themselves, without
artillery, could procure no decisive result; but that, with the aid of
artillery, all things else being equal, cavalry might destroy
infantry. He clearly explained these facts, and many others besides.

He added that artillery really decided the fate of armies and nations;
that men now fought with blows of cannon balls, as they fought with
blows of fists; for in battle, as in a siege, the art consisted in
making numerous discharges converge on one and the same point; that,
amidst the conflict, he who had sufficient address to direct a mass of
artillery suddenly and unexpectedly on any particular point of the
enemy’s force was sure of the victory. This, he said, had been his
grand secret and his grand plan of tactics.

The Emperor conceived that it would be impossible to form a perfect
army, without a revolution in the manners and education of the
soldier, and perhaps even the officer. This could not be accomplished
with our ovens, magazines, commissaries, and carriages. There could be
no perfect army, until, in imitation of the Romans, the soldier should
receive his supply of corn, grind it in his hand-mill, and bake his
bread himself. We could not hope to possess an army, until we should
abolish all our monstrous train of civil attendants.

“I contemplated all these changes,” said he, “but they never could
have been put in practice, except during profound peace. An army in a
state of war would infallibly have rebelled against such innovations.”

I will here insert some notes which I have collected at various times,
relative to the new plans projected by the Emperor, not only in the
army, but on many other points essential to social organization.

The Emperor often observed that he intended, on the establishment of
peace, to induce the Powers of Europe to make an immense reduction in
their standing armies. He wished that each sovereign should limit
himself to his guard, as the skeleton of the army, to be raised in
case of necessity. He intended, should he have found himself compelled
to keep up a numerous army in time of peace, to employ the troops in
public works, and to have disciplined and provisioned them on a
peculiar plan.

He said he had found that, in his plans of campaigns and expeditions,
the greatest difficulty arose from the modern method of provisioning
troops; by which it was necessary first to find corn, then to get it
ground, and next to have the flour made into bread. The Roman custom,
which he highly approved, and which he had intended to introduce
wholly or in part, would have obviated all these inconveniences. “By
the adoption of the ancient plan,” said he, “an army might have
marched to the end of the world. But, it would require time to bring
about such a transition. It could not have been accomplished by a mere
order of the day. I had long entertained the idea of such a change;
but however great might have been my power, I should never have
attempted to introduce it by force. There is no subordination with
empty stomachs. Such an object could only have been effected in time
of peace, and by insensible degrees: I should have accomplished it by
creating new military manners.”

The Emperor constantly insisted on subjecting the whole nation to the
laws of the conscription. “I am inexorable on the subject of
exemption,” said he, one day in the Council of State;—“it would be
criminal. How could I reconcile it to my conscience to expose the life
of one man for the advantage of another? I do not even think I would
exempt my own son.” On another occasion, he said, “The conscription is
the everlasting root of a nation, its moral purification, the real
foundation of its habits. By means of the conscription,” he added,
“the nation was classed according to its real interests for defence
abroad, and tranquillity at home. Organized, built up in this way, the
French people might have defied the world, and might with justice have
renewed the saying of the proud Gauls:—_If the sky should fall, we
will prop it up with our lances._”

According to Napoleon’s plans, the conscription, so far from impeding
education, would have been the means of promoting it. He intended to
have established, in each regiment, a school for the commencement or
continuation of instruction of every kind, either in science, the
liberal arts, or mere mechanics. “And nothing would have been so
easy,” he remarked. “The principle once adopted, we should have seen
each regiment supplied with all that was necessary, out of its own
ranks. And what advantages would have accrued to the mass of society
by the dispersion of these young men, with their acquired knowledge,
even had it been merely elementary, and the habits necessarily
produced by it!”

The Emperor one day, in the course of conversation, observed that, if
he had had leisure there were few institutions in which he would not
have made improvements. He dwelt on the evils arising from lawsuits,
which, he said, were an absolute leprosy, a social cancer. “My code,”
said he, “had singularly diminished lawsuits, by placing numerous
causes within the comprehension of every individual. But there still
remained much for the legislator to accomplish. Not that he could hope
to prevent men from quarrelling: this they have done in all ages; but
he might have prevented a third party in society from living upon the
quarrels of the other two and even stirring up disputes to promote
their own interest. It was, therefore, my intention to establish the
rule that lawyers should never receive fees except when they gained
causes. Thus, what litigations would have been prevented! On the first
examination of a cause, a lawyer would have rejected it, had it been
at all doubtful. There would have been no fear that a man, living by
his labour, would have undertaken to conduct a lawsuit, from mere
motives of vanity; and if he had, he would himself have been the only
sufferer in case of failure. But my idea was opposed by a multitude of
objections, and as I had no time to lose, I postponed the further
consideration of the subject. Yet I am still convinced,” added he,
“that the scheme might, with certain modifications, have been turned
to the best account.”

When speaking of the clergy, the Emperor remarked that he intended to
have rendered curates a very important and useful class of men. “The
more enlightened they are,” said he, “the less will they be inclined
to abuse their ministry.” Therefore, in addition to their theological
studies, he wished them to acquire a knowledge of agriculture and the
elements of medicine and law. “Thus,” said he, “dogmatism and
controversy, the battle-horse and the arms of fools and fanatics,
would gradually have become more and more rare in the pulpit, whence
would have been promulgated the doctrines of pure morality, always
pleasing, eloquent, and persuasive. As men usually love to discourse
on what they know, the clergy would have instructed the peasantry in
their agricultural labours, counselled them against chicanery, and
given advice to the sick. Such pastors would have been real blessings
to their flocks; and, as they would have been allowed a liberal
stipend, they would have enjoyed high consideration: they would have
respected themselves, and would have been respected by all. They would
have possessed the power of feudal lords, and they might, without
danger, have exercised all their influence. A curate would have been a
natural justice of peace, a true moral chief, to whom the direction of
the population might have been safely intrusted, because he would
himself have been dependent on the Government for his appointment and
salary. If to all this be added the study and privation necessary for
the calling, and supposing the individuals to be possessed of good
qualities of heart and mind, it must be confessed that pastors, thus
constituted, would have produced a revolution in society highly
advantageous to the cause of morality.”

I recollect having heard the Emperor, in the Council of State, declaim
against the perquisites of ministers of the Gospel, and point out the
indecorum of their trafficking, as he said, with sacred, and yet
indispensable, objects. He therefore proposed putting an end to this
practice. “By rendering the acts of religion gratuitous,” he observed,
“we shall make their dignity, beneficence, and charity more
conspicuous; and confer a great benefit on the poor. Nothing would be
easier than to substitute legal imposts for these perquisites. Every
one is born, many marry, and all die; and yet births, marriages, and
deaths, are three great subjects of religious jobbing, which, in my
opinion, are particularly objectionable, and which I would wish to
abolish. Since these are matters which concern all equally, why not
place them under a special impost, or include them among the subjects
of general taxation?” This proposal had no result.

I also recollect having heard the Emperor suggest that all public
functionaries, and men employed under Government, even officers in the
army, should themselves form a fund for their future pensions, by a
slight deduction from their annual salaries. “Thus,” said he, “the
future support of these individuals would no longer be an object of
solicitation or a favour; it would be a right. The deductions made
from their salaries would be thrown into a sinking fund, liable to
this application. It would be a certain property, which they might
regard as their own, and upon which they might draw, without
opposition, on retiring from the public service.” It was urged, in
objection, that there were incomes, those of military officers in
particular, that would not admit of deduction.—“Well,” replied the
Emperor, “I will make up the deficiency, I will add whatever is
necessary for the deduction.”—“But,” it was asked, “what end will that
answer? If we have to pay the same amount, where will be the economy?
where will be the advantage?”—“The advantage,” replied the Emperor,
“will be in the difference between certainty and uncertainty; between
the settled course of the treasury, which would no longer have
occasion to concern itself about these accidents, and the tranquillity
of citizens, who would thus possess their guarantee.”

The Emperor warmly defended this idea, and adverted to it oftener than
once; it however produced no result. I have already remarked that I
have often known him to enter upon extempore discussions in this way,
and even to comment on others after they were printed.

The following brief quotation will afford an idea of the labours and
activity of the Emperor’s reign:—“It has been calculated that
Napoleon’s Government, in the space of fourteen years and five months,
presents, 61,139 deliberations of the Council of State, on different
subjects!”[14]

Footnote 14:

  Montvéran’s _Historie critique et raisonnée_

[Illustration:

  NAPOLEON AT ST. HELENA.

  London: Published for Henry Colburn, April, 1836.
]

I have often heard Napoleon repeat that he wished for the
establishment of an European Institute and European prizes, to
superintend and stimulate the learned societies of every country.

He would have wished to fix throughout Europe, uniformity of coins,
weights, and measures, and also uniformity of legislation. “Why,” said
he, “might not my Code Napoleon have served as the groundwork for a
European Code, and my Imperial University have been the basis of a
European University? Thus the whole population of Europe would have
become one and the same family; and every man, while he travelled
abroad, would still have found himself at home.”

Various other subjects, of the above nature, were canvassed at
different times; but I refrain from noticing them, as my memory does
not enable me to enter into details.

ALARMING CHANGE IN THE EMPEROR.—THE GOVERNOR SURROUNDS US WITH
  FORTIFICATIONS.—PANIC TERRORS OF SIR HUDSON LOWE.—GENERAL
  LAMARQUE.—MADAME RECAMIER AND A PRUSSIAN PRINCE.

15th.—About three o’clock, the Emperor, with whom I breakfasted this
morning, sent for me. He wished to take the air, and he endeavoured to
walk as far as the wood; but the air was too keen for him. He then
called at the Grand Marshal’s, and he sat for a considerable time in
an arm-chair, apparently quite exhausted. We remarked the colour of
his countenance, how much he had fallen away, and his evident
debility; and we were much distressed at the change observable in him.

As we passed through the wood, the Emperor cast his eyes on the
fortifications which were surrounding us; and he could not forbear
smiling at these useless and absurd works. He remarked that the ground
in our neighbourhood had been entirely disfigured by the removal of
the kind of turf with which it was covered, and which had been carried
away for the purpose of raising banks. In fact, for the last two
months, the Governor has been incessantly digging ditches,
constructing parapets, erecting palisades, &c. He has quite blockaded
us in Longwood, and the stable at this moment presents every
appearance of a redoubt. We are at a loss to guess where will be the
advantage equivalent to the expense and labour bestowed on these
works, which by turns excite the ill-humour and ridicule of the
soldiers and Chinese, who are employed upon them, and who now call
Longwood and its stable, by the names of _Fort Hudson_ and _Fort
Lowe_. We are assured that Sir Hudson Lowe often starts from his sleep
to devise new measures of security. “Surely,” said the Emperor, “this
seems something like madness. Why cannot the man sleep quietly, and
let us alone? Has he not sense enough to perceive that the security of
our local situation here is sufficient to remove all his panic
terrors?”—“Sire,” said an individual present, “he cannot forget Capri,
which, with 2000 men, thirty pieces of cannon, and perched among the
clouds, was taken by 1200 Frenchmen, commanded by the brave Lamarque,
who could only reach Sir Hudson Lowe by the help of a triple
escalade.”—“Well,” said the Emperor, “this only proves that our
Governor is a better jailor than general.”

For some time past, I have felt seriously alarmed respecting the
health of my son. The pains of which he formerly complained have been
succeeded by violent palpitations, attended by fainting fits; and he
is frequently obliged to rise during the night, to relieve himself by
walking about, or assuming some particular position. Dr. O’Meara
thought he perceived symptoms of aneurism, and considered him to be in
a dangerous state. I requested the chief medical officer. Dr. Baxter,
to hold a consultation with Dr. O’Meara. The result greatly relieved
my anxiety; for his state was declared to have nothing in it very
alarming.

During the conversations of the day, the Emperor alluded to Madame de
Staël, of whom, however, he said nothing new, except mentioning some
letters which had been examined by the police, and which related to
Madame Recamier and a Prussian Prince.

“This correspondence,” said the Emperor, “presented unequivocal proofs
of the influence of Madame Recamier’s charms, and the high regard
which the Prince entertained for her. The letters contained nothing
less than offers or promises of marriage on his part.”

The following is an explanation of this affair. The beautiful Madame
Recamier, whose pure reputation stood unassailed during those stormy
times in which few escaped censure, was residing with Madame de Staël,
to whom she had heroically devoted herself, when one of the Prussian
Princes, who had been made prisoner at Eylau, and who was proceeding
to Italy by Napoleon’s permission, alighted at the castle of Coppet,
with the intention of resting only for a few hours. Here, however, he
was detained during the whole of the summer by the charms of Madame
Recamier, who was voluntarily sharing the exile of her friend. This
lady, and the young Prince, both considered themselves as the victims
of Napoleon, and their common hatred of him, whom they looked upon as
their oppressor, probably engendered the interest which they mutually
conceived for each other. Inspired with an ardent passion, the Prince,
in spite of the difficulties which his exalted rank naturally
suggested, conceived the idea of marrying Madame Recamier. He
communicated his design to Madame de Staël, whose poetic imagination
prompted her to favour a scheme that was calculated to diffuse a sort
of romantic interest over Coppet. The Prince was recalled to Berlin,
but absence produced no change in his sentiments. He still ardently
prosecuted his suit; but Madame Recamier constantly declined this
unexpected elevation, either from natural generosity of feeling, or
from her Catholic prejudice against divorce.

To this circumstance we are indebted for the picture of Corinne, which
is accounted one of the most original creations of Gerard’s pencil.
The Prince ordered the picture as a compliment to Madame Recamier.

Having reverted to Madame de Staël, I will take this opportunity of
observing that since the publication of the preceding parts of my
Journal, I have been visited by some of the most intimate friends of
that celebrated woman. These individuals have assured me that Madame
de Staël has been often represented to have employed expressions in
reference to Napoleon, of which she was wholly incapable,—for example,
the phrase _Robespierre on horseback_, which they said they could take
upon themselves conscientiously to disavow. I have moreover been
informed that Madame de Staël was often more favourable to Napoleon in
her private conversation than in her writings, which, it must be
confessed, are, in all that relates to the Emperor, embittered by a
spirit of malignity and resentment. One of her friends assured me that
he had been very much gratified on finding it mentioned in my Journal
that Napoleon at St. Helena had compared Madame de Staël at once to
Armida and Clorinda I was informed that Madame de Staël, on her part,
at the time of her enthusiasm for the young General of the army of
Italy, had compared him at once to Scipio and Tancred; because, as she
said, he combined the simple virtues of the one with the brilliant
achievements of the other.

After dinner, the Emperor ordered his favourite Racine to be brought
out, and he read to us some of the finest passages in Iphigenia,
Mithridates, and Bajazet. “Though Racine has produced master-pieces in
themselves,” said he, “yet he has diffused over them a perpetual air
of insipidity. Love is eternally introduced, with its tone of languor
and its tiresome accompaniments. But these faults must not be
attributed entirely to Racine, but to the manners of the age in which
he wrote. Love was then, and at even a later period, the whole
business of life with every one. This is always the case when society
is in a state of idleness. As for us,” said he, “our thoughts have
been cruelly turned to other subjects, by the great events of the
revolution.”

The Emperor likewise condemned, by the way, the whole of the
celebrated plan of campaign of Mithridates. He remarked that it might
be fine as a narrative; but that it was absurd as a conception.

PORTRAITS OF THE PRESENT ENGLISH MINISTERS.—THE EMPEROR CONDEMNS ALL
  MINISTRIES.—HONOURABLE EXCEPTIONS.—NAPOLEON’S SENTIMENTS FOR THE
  INDIVIDUALS WHO SERVED HIM.

16th.—I found the Emperor amusing himself by looking over an English
publication, a kind of political almanack. Alluding to the members of
the English Ministry who were mentioned in the work, he said to me:
“Do you know any of them? What was the general opinion of them, when
you were in England?”—“Sire,” I replied, “it is so long since I left
England that nearly all who are now distinguished in the ministry were
then only commencing their career. At that time none of them had come
forward on the scene.”

The Emperor, having mentioned Lord Liverpool, said: “He appears to me
to be the most worthy man among them. I have heard a great deal of
good of him. He seems to have some feeling of propriety and decorum. I
have no objection to a man being my enemy: every one has his own
business and his own duties to perform; but I have certainly a right
to be indignant at unworthy conduct and measures.” I mentioned to the
Emperor that, when I was in England, Lord Liverpool’s father, Mr.
Jenkinson, who successively became Lord Hawkesbury, and Lord
Liverpool, had made his political fortune. He was said to have been a
very good kind of man, and a private friend of George III.; he was
distinguished for assiduity, and particularly directed his attention
to diplomatic documents.

The Emperor next mentioned Lord Sidmouth. “I am told,” said he, “that
he too is a worthy man enough: but he possesses no great share of
understanding. He is one of those honest blockheads who, with the
utmost sincerity, concur in all sorts of mischief.”

“Sire,” said I, “in my time, Lord Sidmouth, under the name of Mr.
Addington, was a member of the House of Commons, and was a man
generally esteemed. He was said to be the creature of Mr. Pitt, who
was understood to have appointed Addington as his successor, in order
to ensure to himself the means of returning to the ministry whenever
he should think fit. The public were certainly greatly astonished to
see Pitt succeeded by Mr. Addington; as the post was considered to be
very far beyond his talents. One of the English opposition papers,
alluding to Mr. Addington, quoted the remark made by a philosopher
(Locke, I believe), who says that the mind of a child is a blank sheet
of paper, on which nature has yet written nothing: and the Journal in
question humorously observed that when nature wrote upon the blank
sheet of the Doctor (the nickname then given to Mr. Addington), it
must needs be confessed, she left plenty of margin.”

“Well,” resumed the Emperor, “what do you know of that sad fellow,
into whose keeping we have been delivered up—that Lord Bathurst?”
“Absolutely nothing, Sire,” I replied, “either of his origin, his
person, or his character.”—“For my part,” said he, with some degree of
warmth, “I have no opportunity of knowing him, except by his conduct
towards me; and in judging from that, I hold him to be the _vilest_
the _basest_ the most _cowardly of men_. The brutality of his orders,
the coarseness of his language, the choice of his agent, all authorize
me to make this declaration. An executioner, such as he has sent
hither, is not easily found. Such a selection could not be made at
random. He must have been sought for, tried, judged, and instructed.
Certainly, this, in my opinion, is sufficient to justify the moral
condemnation of the man who could stoop to so base a course. By the
arm which he moves it is easy to guess what must be his heart!”

I must confess that, yielding to feelings of delicacy, I had at first
almost prevailed on myself to suppress or to soften down the
expressions above quoted: but on the other hand, certain scruples
deterred me from doing so. The shade of him who was so deeply injured
is, thought I, at this moment hovering above me, and seems to
say:—“Since you make me speak, at least preserve my words.” Justice
asserts her rights. Men, in the enjoyment of honours and powers must
feel it incumbent on them to answer charges that are brought against
them. Let the accused justify himself:—if he can, so much the better.

Speaking of Lord Castlereagh, the Emperor said:—“This man governs all
the rest, and rules even the Prince himself, by dint of impudence and
intrigue. Supported by a majority of his own creating, he is always
ready to contend, with the utmost effrontery, against reason, law,
justice, and truth. No falsehood staggers him: he stops at nothing,
well knowing that he can always command votes to applaud and legalize
whatever he does. He has completely sacrificed his country, and is
daily degrading her by acting in opposition to her policy, doctrines,
and interests: in short, he has entirely delivered her up to the
Continent. The situation of England is becoming worse and worse.
Heaven knows how she will extricate herself!”

“Lord Castlereagh,” continued he, “is, I am informed, looked upon,
even in England, as a man politically immoral. He commenced his career
by an act of political apostacy, which, though common enough in his
country, nevertheless, always leaves an indelible stain. He entered
upon public life as an advocate of the people, and he has finally
become the engine of power and despotism. If all that is said of him
be correct, he must be execrated by his countrymen, the Irish, whom he
has betrayed, and by the English, who may justly regard him as the
destroyer of their domestic liberties, and foreign interests.

“He has had the impudence to bring forward in parliament, as authentic
facts, statements which he knew to be false, and which probably he
himself fabricated: and yet, on the authority of these documents,
Murat’s dethronement was decided. Lord Castlereagh makes it his
business to belie himself daily in parliament and in public meetings,
by putting into my mouth language calculated to prejudice me in the
eyes of the English, though he is well aware that he is making false
assertions. This conduct is the more base; since he himself withholds
from me the power of refuting him.

“Lord Castlereagh is the disciple of Pitt, of whom he probably thinks
himself the equal, though he is merely the ape of that distinguished
statesmen. He has incessantly pursued the plans and plots of his
master against France; but even here pertinacity and obstinacy were
perhaps his only good qualities. But Pitt had grand views: with him
his country’s interest took place of every consideration. He possessed
talent and ingenuity; and from England, he moved the lever by which he
ruled and influenced the continental sovereigns at will. Castlereagh,
on the contrary, substituting intrigue for ingenuity, and subsidies
for genius, is regardless of his country’s interest, and has
incessantly employed the credit and influence of the continental
sovereigns merely to confirm and perpetuate his own power at home.
However, such is the course of things in this world, that Pitt with
all his talent, constantly failed, while the incapable Castlereagh has
been completely successful. Oh, blindness of fortune!

“Castlereagh has proved himself entirely the man of the continent.
When master of Europe, he satisfied all the monarchs of the continent,
and only forgot his own country. His conduct has been so prejudicial
to the national interests, so incompatible with the doctrines of his
country, and altogether presents so much the appearance of
inconsistency, that it is difficult to conceive how so wise a people
as the English can allow themselves to be governed by such a fool!

“He adopts legitimacy as the basis of his creed, and wishes to
establish it as a political dogma, while that principle would sap the
very foundation of the throne of his own sovereign. Besides, he
acknowledges Bernadotte in opposition to the legitimate Gustavus IV.,
who sacrificed himself for England; and he acknowledges the usurper
Ferdinand VII., to the detriment of his venerable father, Charles IV.

“He and the Allies establish, as another fundamental basis, the
restoration of the old order of things, the redress of what they term
past injuries, injustice, and depredation; finally, the return of
political morality. Yet Castlereagh scrupled not to sacrifice the
republic of Venice and Genoa, by abandoning the former to Austria, and
annexing the latter to Piedmont. He enriched Russia by the possession
of Poland. He robbed the King of Saxony, for the advantage of Prussia,
who can no longer afford any aid to England. He separated Norway from
Denmark, while, had the latter power been left more independent of
Russia, she might have surrendered to England the key of the Baltic;
and Norway was transferred to Sweden, which, by the loss of Finland
and the Islands of the Baltic, has fallen entirely under the
subjection of Russia. Finally, by a violation of the first principles
of general policy, he neglected, in his all-powerful situation, to
restore the independence of Poland, thereby exposing Constantinople,
endangering the whole of Europe, and preparing a thousand troubles in
Germany.

“I need say nothing of the monstrous inconsistency of a Minister, the
representative of a nation pre-eminently free, restoring Italy to the
yoke of slavery, keeping Spain in a state of bondage, and exerting
every effort to forge fetters for the whole continent. Does he think
that liberty is only proper for the English, and that the rest of
Europe is not fit to enjoy it?[15] But even supposing him to entertain
this opinion, how does he explain his conduct with regard to his own
countrymen, whom he is daily depriving of some of their rights? For
example: the suspension of the _Habeas Corpus_ Act, right or wrong;
the enforcement of the Alien Bill, by which (will it be credited?) the
wife of an Englishman, should she happen to be a foreigner, may be
driven from England, at the will and pleasure of the Minister; the
endless dispersion of spies and informers, those exciting agents and
infernal instigators, by whose aid criminals may always be created,
and victims multiplied. In short, Castlereagh has established at home
the system of cold violence, the iron yoke, which he exercises over
foreign dependencies.[16] No; Lord Castlereagh is not calculated to be
the Minister of a free people, or to command the respect of foreign
nations. He is the vizier of the continental Sovereigns, at their
instigation training his countrymen to slavery: he is the connecting
link, the conductor, by which English gold is dispersed over the
continent, and the despotic doctrines of other countries imported into
England.

Footnote 15:

  Lord Castlereagh actually had the assurance to make this
  declaration, and nearly in the words above quoted, during a debate
  in Parliament, relative to the Constitution of Baden or Bavaria.

Footnote 16:

  I have been informed that, since my departure, the Emperor, reading
  the complaints of the Ionian Islands, and indignantly enumerating
  the acts of the Allies, who, while they talked loudly about
  morality, justice, and the independence of nations, vied with each
  other in appropriating to themselves the wrecks of the Great Empire,
  and scrupled not to parcel out millions of people,—said, “These
  insolent and hypocritical men presumed, in the face of the world, to
  declare that I was selfish, faithless and tyrannical!”

  On learning the fate of unfortunate Parga, he exclaimed, “Parga!
  Parga! Certainly, this act is enough to brand a man and mark his
  forehead for ever!”

“He proves himself to be the partisan, the obsequious associate of the
Holy Alliance,—that mysterious alliance, of which I cannot guess
either the meaning or the object, which can afford neither utility nor
advantage. Can it be directed against the Turks? It would then be for
the English to oppose it. Can it really have for its object the
maintenance of a general peace? That is a chimera, by which it is
impossible diplomatic cabinets can be duped. With them, alliances can
only be formed for the purpose of opposition or counterpoise. They
cannot all be allied together. I cannot therefore comprehend this Holy
Alliance, except by regarding it as a league of sovereigns against
subjects; but, in that case, what has Castlereagh to do with it? If it
be so, will he not, ought he not, one day, to pay dearly for his
conduct?

“I once had Lord Castlereagh in my power,” said the Emperor. “He was
intriguing at Chatillon, when, during one of our momentary successes,
my troops passed beyond the seat of Congress, which was, by this
means, surrounded. The Prime Minister of England maintained no public
character, and was without the law of nations.

“He was aware of his embarrassing situation, and manifested the utmost
uneasiness at thus finding himself in my power. I intimated to him
that he might set his mind at rest, as he was at perfect liberty. I
did this on my own account, and not on his, for certainly I had no
reason to expect any good from him. However, some time afterwards, he
evinced his gratitude in a very peculiar way. When he saw me make
choice of the Isle of Elba, he caused England to be proposed as my
asylum, and employed all his eloquence and subtlety to induce me to
make choice of that country as my place of residence. Now, however, I
may justly entertain suspicion of the offers of Castlereagh, and
doubtless, he already meditated the horrible treatment which he is at
this moment exercising towards me!

“It was a misfortune for England that her Prime Minister treated
personally with the continental Sovereigns: it was a violation of the
spirit of the British constitution. The English at first felt their
pride flattered, at seeing their representative dictate laws to
Europe; but they have now abundant cause to repent, since the result
has proved that, on the contrary, he only stipulated for
embarrassment, degradation and loss.

“It is an undoubted fact, that Castlereagh might have obtained all;
while, on the contrary, from blindness, incapacity, or perfidy, he
sacrificed every thing. When seated at the banquet of Monarchs, he
blushed to dictate peace like a merchant, and determined to treat
liberally like a lord. Thus he gained something in point of vanity;
and, it may be presumed, he lost nothing in point of interest: his
country alone suffered, and will long continue to suffer.

“And the continental Sovereigns are also likely to repent of having
permitted their Prime Ministers to come into personal contact with
each other. The result seems to have been that these Premiers have
created among themselves a sort of secondary sovereignty, which they
mutually guarantee to each other; and, there is good reason to suppose
that it is accompanied by subsidies furnished with the knowledge of
their respective Sovereigns. This business may be very easily managed;
nothing can be more simple, and, at the same time, more ingenious. In
fixing the secret service money, it is very easy to mention that such
a one on the continent has been very useful, that he may still
continue to be so, and, therefore, that it is proper to make an
acknowledgment for his services. This individual, in his turn, may
represent to his Government that some man or other abroad has rendered
important services and even compromised his own interests, and that
consequently he should not be forgotten. It was probably some such
arrangements as these that occasioned an illustrious personage at
Vienna to exclaim, in a moment of vexation, _Such a one costs me the
eyes in my head!_ Doubtless, these disgraceful schemes and
transactions will one day come to light. We shall then see what
enormous fortunes have thus been squandered and swallowed up. They
will perhaps hereafter be recorded in new letters of Barillon; but
nothing will be unfolded, no characters will be disgraced, because
contemporaries will have anticipated all.”

After this long and energetic sally, in which, I may say, I for the
first time heard Napoleon express himself privately, with such warmth
and bitterness against these individuals of whom he had personally
cause to complain he was silent for a few moments. Then resuming, he
said, “And Lord Castlereagh is artful enough to support himself
entirely on Lord Wellington (whose name the Emperor, at the moment,
found among the members of the English Ministry). Wellington has
become his creature! Can it be possible that the modern Marlborough
has joined the train of a Castlereagh, and yoked his victories to the
turpitude of a political mountebank? It is inconceivable! Can
Wellington endure such a thought? Has not his mind risen to a level
with his success?...”

I had remarked that, in general, the Emperor disliked to speak of Lord
Wellington. He seemed carefully to avoid pronouncing his opinion on
him; feeling, no doubt, the impropriety of publicly depreciating the
General who had triumphed over him. On the present occasion, however,
he yielded, without reserve, to the full expression of his feelings.
The consciousness of the indignities that are heaped upon him seemed,
at this moment, to rise forcibly in his mind. Though usually so calm
and unresenting towards those who had done him the greatest injuries,
he now evinced a degree of warmth which I had never before witnessed
in him. His gestures, his features, his tone of voice, were all
expressive of the utmost indignation. I listened to him with
astonishment.

“I have been told,” said he, “that it is through Wellington that I am
here; and I believe it.[17] It is conduct well worthy of him, who, in
defiance of a solemn capitulation, suffered Ney to perish;—Ney, with
whom he had so often been engaged on the field of battle! For my own
part, it is very certain that I gave him a terrible quarter of an
hour. This usually constitutes a claim on noble minds; his was
incapable of feeling it. My fall, and the lot that might have been
reserved for me, afforded him the opportunity of reaping higher glory
than he has gained by all his victories. But he did not understand
this. Well, at any rate, he ought to be heartily grateful to old
Blucher: had it not been for him, I know not where _his Grace_ might
have been to-day; but I know that I, at least, should not have been at
St. Helena. Wellington’s troops were admirable, but his plans were
despicable; or, I should rather say, that he formed none at all. He
had placed himself in a situation in which it was impossible he could
form any; and, by a curious chance, this very circumstance saved him.
If he could have commenced a retreat, he must infallibly have been
lost. He certainly remained master of the field of battle; but was his
success the result of his skill? He has reaped the fruit of a
brilliant victory; but did his genius prepare it for him? His glory is
wholly negative. His faults were enormous. He, the European
Generalissimo, to whose hands so many interests were intrusted, and
having before him an enemy so prompt and daring as myself, left his
forces dispersed, and slumbered in a capital until he was surprised.
And yet such is the power of fatality! In the course of three days, I
three times saw the destiny of France and of Europe escape my grasp.

Footnote 17:

  This idea again occurs in the last lines written by Napoleon before
  his death.

“In the first place, but for the treason of a General, who deserted
from our ranks, and betrayed my designs, I should have dispersed and
destroyed all the enemy’s detached parties before they could have
combined themselves into corps.

“Next, had it not been for the unusual hesitations of Ney at
Quatre-Bras, I should have annihilated the whole English army.

“Finally, on my right, the extraordinary manœuvres of Grouchy,
instead of securing victory, completed my ruin, and hurled France into
the abyss.

“No,” continued he, “Wellington possesses only a special kind of
talent: Berthier also had his! In this he perhaps excels. But he has
no ingenuity; fortune has done more for him than he has done for her.
How different from Marlborough, of whom he seems to consider himself
as the rival and equal. Marlborough, gained battles, ruled cabinets
and guided statesmen; as for Wellington, he has only shewn himself
capable of following the views and plans of Castlereagh. Madame de
Staël said of him that, when out of the field of battle, he had not
two ideas. The saloons of Paris, so distinguished for delicacy and
correctness of taste, at once decided that Madame de Staël was in the
right: and the French Plenipotentiary at Vienna confirmed that
opinion. His victories, their result, and their influence, will rise
in history; but his name will fall, even during his lifetime.”

Alluding to ministries in general, but particularly to collective
ministries, the intrigues, the great and petty passions that agitate
the men who compose them, the Emperor said, “After all, they are only
so many plagues. No one escapes the contagion. A man may be honest
when he enters a ministry; but it seldom happens that he retires from
one without having forfeited his purity of character. I may perhaps
except only two: mine, and that of the United States—mine, because my
Ministers were merely my men of business, and I alone stood
responsible; and that of the United States, because there Ministers
are men of public credit, always upright, always vigilant, and always
rigid.” He concluded with the following remarkable words:—

“I believe that no Sovereign was ever surrounded by more faithful
servants than I was towards the close of my reign. And if I did not
obtain due credit for the selection I had made, it was because the
French are too apt to murmur incessantly.” He then took a review of
his principal Ministers, counting them on his fingers.

“My two great dignitaries,” said he, “Cambacérès and Lebrun, were
distinguished men, and perfectly well disposed. Bassano and
Caulaincourt, two men remarkable for sincerity and rectitude. Molé,
whose name reflects honour on the French Magistracy, is probably
destined to act a part in future ministries. Montalivet was an honest
man; the ministry of Decrès was pure and rigorous; Gaudin was
distinguished for steady and well directed labour; Mollien possessed
vast perspicuity and promptitude; and all my Councillors of State were
prudent and assiduous! All these names will remain inseparably
connected with mine. What country, what age, ever presented a better
composed, or more moral Ministry? Happy the nation that possesses such
instruments, and knows how to turn them to good account!... Though I
was not given to praise, and though my approbation was in general
purely negative, yet I fully appreciated the value of those who served
me, and who have everlasting claims on my gratitude. Their number is
immense, and the most modest are not the least meritorious. I shall
not attempt to name them, because many would have to complain of
having been omitted, and such omission might appear like ingratitude
on my part!”

THE GENERALS OF THE ARMY OF ITALY.—NAPOLEON THE ADOPTED FATHER OF ONE
  OF HIS AIDES-DE-CAMP.—SCANDALOUS NOVEL.—NAPOLEON’S DISLIKE OF
  GAMING.—THE LA ROCHEFOUCAULT FAMILY, &c.

17th.—The Emperor was unwell, and saw nobody during the whole of the
day. In the evening he sent for me. I expressed myself very much
concerned for the state of his health; but he assured me that he was
more indisposed in mind than in body. He began to converse on a
variety of subjects, and this seemed to rouse his spirits.

He once more took a review of the Generals of the army of Italy,
describing their characters, and quoting many anecdotes respecting
them. He spoke of the selfishness of one, of the false pretensions of
another, the folly of a third; the depredations committed by some, the
good qualities of others, and the important services rendered by all.
He dwelt particularly on one, to whom he had been much attached, and
whose defection, he said, had proved a severe wound to his heart. The
Emperor remarked that, from what he knew of that individual, he was
sure he must occasionally suffer deeply from remorse. “Never,”
observed he, “was defection more fatal, or more decidedly avowed. It
was recorded in the Moniteur, and by his own hand. It was the
immediate cause of our disasters, the grave of our power, the cloud of
our glory. And yet,” added he, in a tone of affection, “I am convinced
that his sentiments are better than his reputation; his heart is
superior to his conduct. Of this, he himself appears to be conscious.
The newspapers inform us that when, soliciting in vain for the pardon
of Lavalette, he exclaimed, with warmth, in reply to the obstacles
urged by the Monarch, _Sire, have I not given you more than life_? We
were, it is true,” said the Emperor, “betrayed by others, and in a
manner still more vile; but no other act of apostacy was so solemnly
recorded by official documents.”

The Emperor then observed that, at an early period of life, he had
acted the part of a father to the General above alluded to, who could
not enter the royal corps of artillery, and had been obliged to join a
provincial regiment. “He was,” said the Emperor, “the nephew of one of
my comrades at the school of Brienne, and in the regiment of La Fère,
who, when he emigrated from France, recommended his young relation to
my care. This circumstance imposed upon me the obligation of acting
the part of his uncle and his father, which I literally did. I took a
real interest in his welfare, and felt a pleasure in advancing his
fortune. His father was a knight of St. Louis, the proprietor of some
iron-works in Burgundy, and a man of considerable fortune.”

Napoleon mentioned that, in 1794, as he was returning from the army of
Nice to Paris, he visited the father’s _chateau_, where he was
magnificently treated, as he was already beginning to enjoy a certain
degree of reputation. The father, according to the son’s account, was
an absolute miser. However, he determined to give a handsome reception
to the guest who had been so kind to his son. His entertainment was
distinguished by all the ostentation which misers are fond of
displaying. He exhibited complete prodigality. It was in July or
August, and he ordered immense fires to be kindled in all the
apartments. “This,” said the Emperor, “would have been an incident for
Moliere.”

Speaking of the manners of Paris, and its immense population, the
Emperor adverted to the many evils which he said must inevitably exist
in all great capitals, where depravity of every kind is continually
stimulated by want, passion, wit, and the facilities afforded by
bustle and confusion. He often repeated, that all capitals were so
many Babylons. He adduced several proofs of odious libertinism with
respect to Paris; and he mentioned that, after he became Emperor, he
had perused the most scandalous book that was ever conceived by the
most depraved imagination. It was a novel, which, even in the time of
the Convention, had proved so offensive to public morals as to
occasion the imprisonment of its author, who had continued in
confinement ever since, and whom the Emperor believed to be still
living. I have forgotten the name of the writer, and it was the first
time I had ever heard the production mentioned.

The Emperor said that he had endeavoured, as far as circumstances
permitted, to suppress many sources of immorality; but in some
instances, he had not had courage to descend into details. For
example, he prohibited masked gaming, and even had it in view to
prohibit all gaming houses; but when I wished to have the subject
thoroughly discussed in my presence, it proved to be a very difficult
question. I mentioned that the police had even prohibited us from
playing privately in one of the principal houses of the Faubourg St.
Germain. The Emperor observed that he had had no idea of this act of
tyranny; and yet, as I assured him, it was exercised by Fouché in his
name. “That may be,” said he, “but I knew nothing of it; and so it was
with all the details of the police, high, middling, and low.”

He then questioned me respecting the kind of gaming to which I had
just alluded; and observing that, in my replies, I always used the
plural _we_, he interrupted me, saying,—“Were you yourself one of the
party? Were you a gamester?”—“Alas! Sire, I unfortunately was. Only at
long intervals, it is true. But st¡ll, when the fit seized me, it
urged me to excess.”—“I am very glad I knew nothing of it at the
time,“ said the Emperor, “otherwise you would have been ruined in my
esteem. This circumstance shews how little we knew of each other, and
it also proves that you could not have made yourself many enemies; for
there were charitable souls about me who would have taken care to
inform me of your failing. My prejudice against gaming was well known.
A gamester was sure to forfeit my confidence. I had not leisure to
enquire whether I was right or wrong; but, whenever I heard that a man
was addicted to gaming, I placed no more reliance on him.”

This allusion to the Faubourg St. Germain led us to mention many of
the principal names in the capital. The Emperor made some remarks on
the different members of the family of La Rochefoucault. He mentioned
the lady of honour to the Empress Josephine; her husband, who was
ambassador to Vienna and Holland; her brother, the member of the
Legislative Body; their father, M. de Liancourt, whom he highly
respected; and finally, the daughter whom he had given in marriage to
Prince Aldobrandini, brother to Prince Borghese. He repeated that he
had once entertained the idea of making her the wife of Ferdinand VII.
He also mentioned another, M. de la Rochefoucault, who died in prison
at the commencement of his reign, and he asked me what relation he was
to the others. I could not inform him. I knew nothing either of the
person or the circumstance mentioned by the Emperor.

“He was,” said Napoleon, “the author of a conspiracy against my
person, which I never mentioned to you: it just now occurs to my
recollection.

“This M. de la Rochefoucault formed in Paris, in behalf of the King,
who was then at Mittau, a conspiracy, the first stroke of which was to
be the death of the head of the Government. M. de la Rochefoucault
ended his days in prison, after a long confinement. Some one having
procured a knowledge of this affair, a confidential agent of the
police pretended to enter into the conspiracy, and to become one of
its most active members. He received his credentials at a _chateau_ in
Lorraine, from an old gentleman, who had held a distinguished rank in
the army of Condé, and who had been enabled to return to France by the
amnesty of the First Consul. This gentleman, who, to do him justice,
was a very worthy man, was appointed to accredit the members of the
conspiracy, and to afford them the necessary facilities for gaining
access to Louis XVIII. at Mittau. He had evinced great repugnance on
entering into the conspiracy. He said it was now too late to think of
such enterprises, as France was beginning to enjoy repose. He solemnly
declared his disapproval of any violence being offered to the First
Consul, whom he now looked upon as something sacred. After having
several interviews with Louis XVIII. at Mittau, the police agent
returned with a knowledge of the whole affair. M. de la Rochefoucault
and his party were arrested. If they had but known who disclosed their
plot!”

          PONIATOWSKI THE REAL KING OF POLAND.—CHARACTERISTIC
                         ANECDOTES OF NAPOLEON.

18th,—19th.—The conversation turned on Poland, roused as she had been
at the voice of Napoleon. We spoke of the individuals who seemed to
have been destined to ascend the throne of that country: each made his
own conjectures on this subject. The Emperor remained silent for some
time, and at length interrupted us, saying: “Poniatowski was the real
King of Poland. He possessed every quality requisite for that high
station.” He said no more.

At another moment, the Emperor smiled at the pains that had been taken
to obliterate his emblems and devices on the public monuments which he
had erected, “They may,” said he, “be withdrawn from the public eye;
but they cannot be erased from the page of history, or from the
recollection of connoisseurs and artists. I acted differently,” added
he; “I respected all the vestiges of royalty that existed when I came
into power. I even restored the _fleurs-de-lis_, and other royal
emblems, when chronological correctness required it.”

An individual present remarked that Prince Lucien had manifested
precisely the same sentiments. The Palais Royal was assigned as his
place of residence on the Emperor’s return in 1815, and, observing, as
he ascended the staircase, the groupes of _fleurs-de-lis_ on the
tapestry that overhung the walls, he said to the officer who attended
him: “This will all be taken down, I presume?”—“Why, Monseigneur?”
“Because these are the devices of the enemy.” “Well! Monseigneur, why
should they not remain as our trophies?”—“You are right,” replied the
Prince, “this is exactly my way of viewing the matter.”

To-day, I have been able to collect but little from the Emperor’s
conversation.... I shall, therefore, fill up this void, and that of
the succeeding day, by inserting some anecdotes which I find in
scattered memoranda on the cover of my ordinary Journal: for here I
noted down such particulars as I found I had forgotten to insert in
their proper place, together with any old reminiscences that happened
to occur to me, or delicate points which, in our state of captivity,
required to be treated with prudence and circumspection. These notes
also contain many facts, which have been subsequently collected from
unquestionable sources.

Many of these articles have no relation to each other; but, they are
all connected with the object of the present work, whether they serve
to prove the false colours in which Napoleon has been painted, or
whether, on the contrary, they develop the real traits of his
character. May the perusal of this Journal induce those who have been
about the Emperor to record on their parts all they know, or have
heard respecting him!

Formerly, a great deal was said about the excessive severity and
violence exercised by the Emperor towards the individuals about his
person. Now, however, it is acknowledged that every one who served him
adored him, precisely for his kindness of heart and manners. Since my
return to Europe, a gentleman of high rank, whose name alone would be
sufficient to command credit, and whose high functions kept him
constantly about the person of the Emperor, in foreign expeditions as
well as in the interior of the palace, has assured me that he never in
his life knew Napoleon to strike a servant, except on one occasion.
This was when one of his grooms, at the retreat of Saint Jean d’Acre,
refused to give up his horse for the transport of the invalids, while
he, the General-in-Chief, had surrendered his, and had obliged all his
staff to do so likewise. But, after all, added my informant, it was
easy to perceive that this act was prompted by policy rather than by
natural severity of temper: the scene took place in the presence of
dispirited troops, to whom it was necessary to give proofs of the
lively interest that was felt for them.

It used to be a common remark that Napoleon was not less morose to the
individuals of his Court than to those in his service; and that he
never had any thing complimentary or agreeable to say to any one.
Among the multitude of facts that might be adduced in contradiction to
this assertion, I will mention the following, to which I was myself a
witness. On his return from the disastrous campaign of Leipsic, the
Emperor received the officers of his household at an unusual hour. He
presented himself to us with an air of melancholy. Stepping up to the
individual who was next me (M. de Beauveau, I think,) whose son, yet a
youth, had served in the campaign, in the guard of honour, or some
other corps. Napoleon said to him: “Your son’s conduct has been
admirable. He has conferred honour on his name. He has been wounded;
but what of that? He may proudly boast of having thus early shed his
blood for his country.”

At the same period, at one of his levees, after giving some orders to
General Gerard, whose reputation was then beginning to attract
attention, the Emperor concluded with some words evidently kindly
meant, though somewhat obscure. After advancing a few paces to
continue his circuit, he turned back to General Gerard, apparently
having read in his countenance that he had not precisely understood
him, and he said very distinctly: “I observed that, if I had many men
like you, I should consider all my losses repaired, and should think
myself master of my fortune.”

About the same period, I had an opportunity of witnessing a proof of
the ascendency which the Emperor could exercise over the human mind,
and the sort of veneration with which he was regarded. A General,
whose name I do not know, and who had been severely wounded in the
leg, attended the Emperor’s levee. Napoleon had been informed that
amputation was pronounced to be absolutely indispensable, but that the
unfortunate officer obstinately refused to submit to it. “Why do you
object to an operation that will preserve your life?” said Napoleon:
“It cannot be want of courage, since you have so often braved danger
on the field of battle! Is it contempt of life? But does not your
heart tell you that, even with the remaining limb, you may be useful
to your country, and render her signal services?” The officer was
silent; the expression of his countenance was calm and placid, but
still negative. The Emperor seemed sorry for him, and passed on to
speak to some other persons, when the officer, who had apparently
formed a sudden resolution, turned to the Emperor, saying, “Sire, if
your Majesty orders me to submit to the operation, I will immediately
do so,”—“My dear Sir,” replied the Emperor, “I have no power to do
that. I wished to move you by persuasion; but Heaven forbid that I
should command you!” I think I have heard it said that, on leaving the
palace, the wounded officer submitted to the operation.

The Emperor, on his return from the Isle of Elba, arrived at the
Tuileries very late in the evening. His levee, on the following day,
was, as may be supposed, exceedingly numerous. When the door was
thrown open, and he presented himself before us, it would be difficult
for me to explain what were my ideas and sensations. The Emperor
appeared the same as usual; just as though he had never left the
palace, and had held a levee but yesterday; his countenance, attitude,
dress, manners, all were unaltered. I was powerfully affected, and I
believe my sensations were shared by all present. The force of
sentiment prevailed over respect; and all rushed forward to meet him.
The Emperor himself was visibly moved; and he embraced several of the
most distinguished persons. He then commenced his circuit as usual.
His voice was mild, his countenance placid, and his manner affable: he
spoke with kindness to every one. “How!” said he, addressing a certain
individual, “What! the Major-General of the white army two paces from
me!” Several of those present seemed to be labouring under a little
embarrassment, owing to the extraordinary events that had just taken
place; as for Napoleon, he appeared as though nothing had happened. He
did not forget that he had released them all from their allegiance at
Fontainebleau.

The following anecdotes prove his correctness of judgment and coolness
of temper. They also shew that, when at the summit of his power, his
moderation and equity were never shaken, even in matters most directly
personal, and on subjects on which he might have been presumed to be
most delicate and susceptible.

When Moreau was arrested, on the charge of being concerned in the
affair of Georges and Pichegru, one of the First Consul’s
Aides-de-camp, who was, perhaps, also the Aide-de-camp of Moreau, or
had served under his command, visited him in prison, and evinced great
interest for him. “This is all very natural,” said Napoleon, on being
informed of the circumstance, “I certainly cannot blame such conduct;
but I must appoint another Aide-de-camp. The post is one perfectly
confidential: there can be no division in an affair so personal as
this.” Napoleon gave the command of a regiment to this Aide-de-camp
(Col. Laucée), who, some time afterwards, perished at the head of it,
in one of the actions which preceded the capitulation of Ulm.

About the same period, the Prefect of Liege, equally remarkable for
his administrative talents and excellent character, was suddenly
summoned to Paris; and he hastened thither, pleased with the
anticipation of the proofs of satisfaction which he trusted he should
receive, because he deserved them. He was, however, invited by the
Grand Judge to visit him before he should present himself to the First
Consul; and he found himself unexpectedly interrogated, _ex officio_,
on the subject of a letter that was presented to him. At first he
could not deny the signature, so accurately had his own been imitated;
but he positively disavowed the sentiments it contained. It consisted
of a justification of Moreau, and was filled with imprecations against
the Consul. The whole was an infamous plot, contrived by a high public
functionary, an enemy of the Prefect’s, for the purpose of ruining
him. The Prefect, having proved that he knew nothing of the letter
attributed to him, appeared at the First Consul’s grand audience.
Napoleon treated him with particular attention, and when he took his
leave, he said to him, “Return and resume your functions, which you
know so well how to fulfil. You carry with you my utmost esteem. Let
this public testimony of your good conduct console you for the painful
feelings that calumny and falsehood may have occasioned you.”

The following will shew that Napoleon was not inclined hastily to
condemn a certain degree of independence, even though it might be
somewhat unreasonable:—

M. de Montalivet, who was Minister of the Interior during the Empire,
has informed me that, being one day left alone with the Emperor, after
a Council of Ministers, he thus addressed him:—“Sire, it is not
without considerable embarrassment that I presume to mention to your
Majesty a circumstance which is certainly extremely ridiculous; but a
Prefect, a young Auditor, obstinately persists in withholding from me
the title which custom has assigned to all your Ministers. Some
persons, holding inferior situations in my department, observing that
he never used the customary title of Monseigneur in speaking of me,
and thinking it an instance of affectation, very absurdly required
him, in my name, to observe the formality; and he peremptorily
refused. I am quite ashamed that this affair should have arisen; but
as it is, the thing has been carried to such a point that I cannot
give it up.” At first, the Emperor could scarcely credit such
obstinacy and folly on the part of the Prefect. After a short pause,
he said to M. de Montalivet, smiling, “But, after all, there is no
such obligation specified in the Code. The young man is perhaps good
fruit, though not yet ripe. However, this refractory conduct must be
checked. Desire his father to come to me; surely the young man will
not disobey his orders.” What a delicate, moral sentiment was thus
conveyed!

On the evening of the 20th of March, the Emperor had no sooner entered
his apartments in the Tuileries, than the Captain of Dragoons, G. D—--
appeared before him. He was the bearer of the capitulation of
Vincennes, which had just been obtained by dint of extraordinary
courage and address. Napoleon at first smiled at the details that were
communicated to him; but, being struck with the vehement manner and
language of the narrator, and suddenly calling to mind the fate of
Governor Puyvert at Vincennes, he hastily exclaimed, “But, Sir, you
say nothing of the Governor; what has become of him?”—“Sire,” resumed
the officer, in a calmer tone, “he has been furnished with a passport,
and has been escorted out of Paris.” Napoleon then advanced, and
seizing the officer’s hand, with an expression that sufficiently
betrayed the anxiety with which he had just been agitated, “I am
satisfied,” said he; “you have done well, very well!”

I find, in one of my notes, that the Emperor once remarked that the
finest military letter he had ever read was one written during the
consulate, by a soldier of the south, named Leon. From this high
praise, it must of course be presumed that the letter was a very
extraordinary one. I myself know nothing of it; but I merely mention
the circumstance, in the hope that some one may be induced to lay the
document before the public, in case it should not be already upon
record.

Napoleon, during his military career, fought sixty battles; Cæsar
fought but fifty.

It was asked one day, in Napoleon’s presence, how it happens that
misfortunes, which are yet uncertain, often distress us more than
afflictions which we are already suffering. “Because,” observed the
Emperor, “in the imagination, as in calculation, the power of what is
unknown is _immeasurable_.”

After having given any one an important mission, or traced out the
plan of any great enterprise, the Emperor used frequently to say,
“Come, Sir, be speedy: use despatch; and do not forget that the world
was created in six days.”

On an occasion of this kind, he concluded by observing to the
individual whom he was addressing, “Ask me for whatever you please,
except _time_: that’s the only thing that is beyond my power.”

On another occasion, Napoleon commissioned a person to execute some
important business, which he expected would be finished in the course
of the same day. It was not, however, completed until late on the
following day. At this, the Emperor manifested some degree of
dissatisfaction; and the person, to excuse himself, said that he had
worked all day. “But had you not all night too?” replied Napoleon.

The Emperor directed particular attention to the improvement and
embellishment of the markets of the capital. He used to say, “The
market-place is the Louvre of the common people.”

Equality of rights, that is to say, the power of aspiring and
obtaining, enjoyed by all individuals, was one of the points to which
Napoleon attached particular importance. This regard for equality was
one of his peculiar traits, and seemed to belong innately to his
character. “I have not reigned all my life,” he would say: “before I
became a Sovereign, I recollect having been a subject; and I can never
forget how powerfully the sentiment of equality influences the mind
and animates the heart.”

When he was once giving a project to be drawn up by one of his
Councillors of State, he said, “Let me charge you to respect liberty;
and above all, equality. With regard to liberty, it might be possible
to restrain it, in a case of extremity; circumstances might demand and
justify such a step: but Heaven forbid that we should ever infringe
upon equality! It is the passion of the age; and I wish to continue to
be the man of the age!”

In Napoleon’s eyes, merit was single, by itself, and he recompensed it
uniformly. Thus the same titles, and the same decorations, were
awarded equally to the ecclesiastic, the soldier, the artist, the
philosopher, and the man of letters. It may truly be said that in no
other country or period was merit more highly honoured, or talent more
magnificently rewarded. On these points, the Emperor’s views were
unlimited. I have already mentioned that he one day said, “If
Corneille had lived in my time, I would have made him a prince.”

The Emperor said one day at St. Helena, “Nature seems to have made me
for great reverses; they have found me with a mind of marble. The
thunderbolt cannot make an impression upon, but merely glides over,
it.”

At another time, when some vexation arose at St. Helena, one of those
about Napoleon exclaimed, “Ah, Sire, this must indeed increase your
hatred of the English.” Upon which the Emperor, shrugging up his
shoulders, said, in a mingled tone of pleasantry and contempt,
“Prejudiced man! Say rather that at most it may increase my hatred of
this or that particular Englishman.... But, since we are on this
subject, let me tell you that a man, he who has the true feelings of a
man, never cherishes hatred. His anger or ill-humour never goes beyond
the irritation of the moment,—the electric shock. He who is formed to
discharge high duties, and to exercise authority, never considers
persons; his views are directed to things, their weight, and
consequence.”

On a certain occasion, he remarked that he doubted not but his
character would gain in proportion as it descended to posterity; and
that future historians would conceive themselves bound to avenge the
injustice of contemporaries. Excess is always succeeded by reaction.
Besides, he was of opinion that, when viewed from a distance, his
character would appear in a more favourable light, by being relieved
from many useless encumbrances. He would hereafter be judged by
general views, and not by petty details. Every thing would be in
harmony, and all local irregularities would disappear. Above all, he
would not be compared with himself; but with what might exist at a
future period. He added that now, as hereafter, he could proudly
submit every act of his private life to the most rigid scrutiny,
confident that the severest judges would pronounce him to be free from
crime.

The Emperor one day told me that he had conceived the idea of
composing his _Diplomatic History_, or a complete account of his
negotiations, from Campo Formio to his abdication. If he should have
fulfilled his design, what an historical treasure will thus be
presented to the world!

Speaking of military eloquence, the Emperor said, “When, in the heat
of the battle, passing along the line, I used to exclaim, ‘Soldiers,
unfurl your banners, the moment is come,’ our Frenchmen absolutely
leapt for joy. I saw them multiply a hundred-fold. I then thought
nothing impossible.”

Many of Napoleon’s military harangues are well known. The following
has been communicated to me by one who heard it on the spot. When
reviewing the 2d regiment of horse chasseurs at Lobenstein, two days
before the battle of Jena, Napoleon, addressing the Colonel, said:
“How many men are there here?”—“Five hundred,” replied the Colonel;
“but there are many raw troops among them.”—“What signifies that,”
said the Emperor, in a tone which denoted surprise at the observation,
“are they not all Frenchmen?”—Then, turning to the regiment, “My
lads,” said he, “you must not fear death. When soldiers defy death,
they drive him into the enemy’s ranks.” He here made a motion with his
arm expressive of the action to which he alluded. At these words a
sudden movement among the troops, accompanied by a murmur of
enthusiasm, seemed the precursor of the memorable victory which
forty-eight hours afterwards overthrew the column of Rosbach.

At the battle of Lützen, the army was chiefly composed of conscripts,
who had never been in any engagement. It is said that, in the heat of
the action, Napoleon rode along the rear of the 3d rank of infantry,
supporting and encouraging the young troops. “This is nothing, my
lads,” said he, “stand firm. France has her eye on you. Show that you
can die for your country.”

Napoleon entertained a high regard for the Germans. “I levied many
millions of imposts on them, it is true,” said he, “that was
necessary; but I should never have insulted them or treated them with
contempt. I esteemed the Germans. They may hate me; that is natural
enough. I was forced for ten years to fight upon the dead bodies of
their countrymen. They could not know my real designs or give me
credit for my ultimate intentions, which were calculated to render
Germany a great nation.”

The Emperor, alluding to one of his decisions, remarked:—“I could do
nothing in that case, I suffered myself to be moved, and I yielded.
There I was wrong: a statesman’s heart should be in his head.”

Napoleon observed that the physical faculties of men were strengthened
by their dangers or their wants: “Thus,” said he, “the Bedouin of the
desert has the piercing sight of the lynx; and the savage of the
forest has the keen scent of beasts of prey.”

One day mention was made of a person who, though distinguished for his
ideas and his acts, nevertheless betrayed gross faults in his manners
and mode of expressing himself. The Emperor explained this discordance
by saying: “You see the fault is in his first education; his swaddling
clothes were neither fine nor clean.”

When speaking of the danger which he had incurred among the Five
Hundred, on the 18th Brumaire, he attributed it militarily to local
circumstances. He had been obliged to enter the Orangery at one of the
extremities, and to pass along the whole length of it. “The misfortune
was,” said he, “that, instead of facing my opponents, I was compelled
to present my flank to them.”

When we were alluding to an individual who seemed to think that he
could overawe us by speaking almost in a tone and language of menace,
the Emperor said: “This is a very absurd idea. Nobody is afraid now. A
child would not be afraid. Even little Emmanuel (pointing to my son)
would exchange pistol shots with any one who might require him to do
so.” These words of the Emperor’s will probably influence my son
throughout the rest of his life.

Napoleon, on his return from the Russian campaign, was so struck by
the courage and strength of mind displayed by Ney that he created him
Prince of the Moskowa, and he was often heard to say: “I have two
hundred millions in my coffers, and I would give them all for Ney.”

Remarking on the certainty of the ultimate triumph of modern
principles, the Emperor said: “They cannot but triumph. Mark the train
of events: even oppression now-a-days turns to the disadvantage of the
oppressor.”

On a certain occasion, it was observed to the Emperor that he was not
fond of putting forward his own merits; “That is,” replied he,
“because with me morality and generosity are not in my mouth, but in
my nerves. My iron hand was not at the extremity of my arm, it was
immediately connected with my head. I did not receive it from nature;
calculation alone has enabled me to employ it.”

Speaking of the ill humour and discontent frequently evinced by the
inhabitants of Paris, the Emperor asked what he was expected to do
after all he had accomplished. “Sire,” said some one present, “it was
wished that your Majesty should stop your horse.” “Stop my horse!”
resumed Napoleon, “that was easily said. My arm was strong enough, it
is true, to stop, with a single check, all the horses of the
continent. But I could not bridle the English fleets: and there lay
all the mischief. Had not the people sense enough to see this?”

One day, when the Emperor was reproaching a person for not correcting
the vices which he knew he possessed, “Sir,” said he, “when a man
knows his moral infirmity, he may cure his mind, just as he would cure
his arm or his leg.”

The Emperor, speaking of the nobility which he had created, regretted
that he had been so ill understood. It was, he said, one of his
grandest and happiest ideas. He had in view three objects of the
highest importance, and all three would have been accomplished: 1st,
to reconcile France with Europe, and to restore harmony, by seeming to
adopt European customs: 2nd, by the same means to bring about a
complete reconciliation and union between old and new France; and 3d,
to banish feudal nobility, the only kind that is offensive,
oppressive, and unnatural. “By my plan,” said the Emperor, “I should
soon have succeeded in substituting positive and meritorious qualities
for antiquated and odious prejudices. My national titles would have
exactly restored that equality which feudal nobility proscribed. They
were conferred as the reward of merit of every kind. For genealogical
parchments I substituted noble actions, and for private interests, the
interests of the country. Family pride would no longer have been
founded on obscure and imaginary circumstances, but would have rested
on the noblest pages of our history. Finally, I would have banished
the odious pretension of blood; an absurd idea, a theory that has no
real existence; for we all know very well that there is but one race
of men, and that one is not born with boots on his legs, and another
with a packsaddle on his back.

“All the nobility in Europe, those who really govern it, were pleased
with my plan. They unanimously applauded an institution the novelty of
which enhanced its pre-eminence; and yet this very novelty would have
sapped its foundation and infallibly destroyed it. Why did that
opinion, to which I had secured a triumph, precisely serve the purpose
of its enemies? But I have suffered this misfortune oftener than
once.”

          ON THE DIFFICULTIES WHICH HISTORY PRESENTS.—GEORGES,
                 PICHEGRU, MOREAU, THE DUKE D’ENGHIEN.

20th.—“It must be admitted, my dear Las Cases,” said the Emperor to me
to-day, “that it is most difficult to obtain absolute certainties for
the purposes of history. Fortunately it is, in general, more a matter
of mere curiosity than of real importance. There are so many kinds of
truths! The truth which Fouché, or other intriguers of his stamp will
tell, for instance; even that which many very honest people may tell,
will, in some cases, differ essentially from the truth which I may
relate. The historic truth, so much in request, to which every body
eagerly appeals, is too often but a term. At the time of the events,
during the heat of conflicting passions, it cannot exist; and if, at a
later period, all parties are agreed respecting it, it is because
those persons who were interested in the events, those who might be
able to contradict what is asserted, are no more. What then is,
generally speaking, the truth of history? A concerted fable, as it has
been very ingeniously remarked. There are, in these matters, two
essential points, very distinct from each other: the positive facts,
and the moral intentions. With respect to the positive facts, it would
seem that they ought to be incontrovertible; yet you will not find two
accounts agreeing together in relating the same fact: some have
remained contested points to this day, and will ever remain so. With
regard to moral intentions, how shall we judge of them, even admitting
the candour of those who relate events? And what will be the case if
the narrators are not sincere, or if they should be actuated by
interest or passion? I have given an order, but who was able to read
my thoughts, my real intentions? Yet every one will take up that
order, and measure it according to his own scale, or adapt it to his
own plans or system. See the different colourings that will be given
to it by the intriguer, whose plans it disturbs or favours: see how he
will distort it. The man who assumes importance, to whom the ministers
or the sovereign may have hinted something in confidence on the
subject, will do the same thing; as will the numerous idlers of the
palace, who, having nothing better to do than to listen at doors, and
invent when they can not hear. And each person will be so certain of
what he tells! and the inferior classes of people, who have received
their information from these privileged mouths, will be so certain, in
their turn, of its correctness! and then memoirs are digested,
memorandums are written, witticisms and anecdotes are circulated; and
of such materials is history composed!

“I have seen the plan of my own battle, the intention of my own
orders, disputed with me, and opinion decide against me! Is not that
the creature giving the lie to its creator? Nevertheless, my opponent,
who contradicts me, will have his adherents. This it is which has
prevented me from writing my own private memoirs, from disclosing my
individual feelings, which would, naturally, have exhibited the shades
of my private character. I could not condescend to write confessions,
after the manner of Jean Jaques Rousseau, which every body might have
attacked; and, therefore, I have thought proper to confine the
subjects of my dictations here to public acts. I am aware that even
these relations may be contested: for where is the man in this world,
whatever be his right, and the strength and power of that right, who
may not be attacked and contradicted by an adverse party? But, in the
opinion of those men who are wise and impartial, of those who reflect
and are reasonable, my voice, after all, will be as good as another’s;
and I have little fear for the final decision. So much light has been
diffused in our days that I rely upon the splendour which will remain
after passions shall have subsided and clouds passed away. But, in the
mean time, how many errors will arise! People will often give me
credit for a great deal of depth and sagacity on occasions which were,
perhaps, most simple in themselves; I shall be suspected of plans
which I never formed.[18] It will be inquired whether I did or did not
aspire, in reality, to universal dominion. The question will be
argued, at length, whether my absolute sway and my arbitrary acts were
the result of my character or of my calculations; whether they were
determined by my own inclination or by the influence of circumstances;
whether I was led into the wars in which I was constantly engaged, by
my own inclination, or against my will; whether my insatiable
ambition, which has been so much deprecated, was kindled by the thirst
for dominion and glory, or by my love of order and my concern for the
general welfare; for that ambition will deserve to be considered under
all those different aspects. People will canvass the motives which
guided me in the catastrophe of the Duke d’Enghien,[19] and so on with
respect to many other events. Sometimes they will distort what was
perfectly straight, and refine upon what was quite natural. It was not
for me to treat of all those subjects here: it would have appeared as
if I were pleading my cause—and that I disdain to do. If the rectitude
and the sagacity of historians can enable them to form, from what I
have dictated on general matters, a correct opinion and just notions
respecting those things which I have not mentioned, so much the
better. But, along with the faint ray thus afforded, how many false
lights will appear to them—from the fables and falsehoods of the great
intriguers (who all had their views, their plots, their private
negotiations, which, being mixed up with the main objects, tend to
render the whole an inextricable chaos), to the disclosures, _the
portfolios_, and even the assertions of my ministers, who, with the
best intentions, will have to state not so much what really existed as
what they believe to have existed; for which of them ever possessed
the entire general conception of my mind? Their share of it was, most
frequently, one of the elements of a great whole, which they did not
know. They will, therefore, only have seen that side of the prism
which concerned them; and, even then, how will they have seen it? Did
it reach them entire? Was it not already broken? And yet probably
every one of them, judging from what he has seen, will give the
fantastical result of his own combinations as my true system; and here
again we have the admitted fable, which will be called history. Nor
can it be otherwise. It is true that, as there are many, they will be
far from agreeing together. However, in their positive assertions they
would have the advantage over me: for I should very frequently have
found it most difficult to affirm confidently what had been my whole
and entire thoughts on any given subject. It is well known that I did
not strive to subject circumstances to my ideas; but that I in general
suffered myself on the contrary to be led by them; and who can
calculate beforehand the chances of accidental circumstances or
unexpected events? I have, therefore, often found it necessary to
alter essentially my plan of proceeding, and have acted through life
upon general principles, rather than according to fixed plans. The
mass of the general interests of mankind, what I considered to be the
advantage of the greater number, such were the anchors on which I
relied, but around which I most frequently floated at the caprice of
chance,” &c.

Footnote 18:

  A man of great understanding and information, who had enjoyed much
  of the Emperor’s confidence, and had had a great deal to do with the
  Emperor directly, said to me, after the first abdication, with the
  appearance of intimate conviction, that Napoleon’s plan had been to
  abandon Paris, after he should have completed his conquests, and to
  make Rome the capital of the Empire. I had, at that time, so little
  knowledge of the Emperor that this intelligence staggered me; but
  now I cannot help inquiring where my informant could have got this
  idea?

Footnote 19:

  It is well known to how many different versions, to how many various
  conjectures, this sad event gave rise.

After these memorable expressions, the present is the best opportunity
of returning to an historical point which in an early part of this
work I promised to treat of, and which ought to have found a place
long before this; I allude to the conspiracy of Georges and Pichegru,
and the trial of the Duke d’Enghien. I shall presently state the true
reasons of this transposition, and of the long delay that has
occurred.

“War,” said the Emperor, “had some time since re-commenced with
England, when suddenly our coasts, our high roads, and the capital,
were inundated with agents from the Bourbons. A great number of them
were arrested; but their plans could not yet be discovered. They were
of all ranks and descriptions. All the passions were roused, the
agitation of the public became extreme; a storm was gathering; the
crisis assumed the most alarming aspect; the agents of the police had
exhausted all their means, without being able to obtain any
information. My own sagacity saved me,” observed Napoleon. “Having
risen on one occasion in the night, to work, as I used frequently to
do, _chance, which governs the world_, directed my eyes to one of the
last reports of the police, containing the names of those persons who
had already been arrested in consequence of this affair, to which no
clue had yet been obtained. Amongst those names I observed that of a
surgeon in the army; I immediately concluded that such a man must be
an intriguer rather than a devoted fanatic, and I ordered every
measure likely to extort a prompt confession to be instantly resorted
to against him. The affair was immediately placed in the hands of a
military commission; in the morning he was sentenced, and threatened
with immediate execution if he did not speak. Half an hour afterwards
he had disclosed every thing, even to the most minute details. The
nature and the extent of the plot, which had been got up in London,
was then known, and the intrigues of Moreau, and the presence of
Pichegru in Paris, &c. were discovered soon after.”

I omit all the details of that affair; they may be seen in the Letters
written from the Cape in refutation of those of Dr. Warden, and in the
work of Mr. O’Meara. The particulars which I should relate would be
precisely the same as those contained in the work last mentioned; they
are derived from the same source. With respect to the accusation
relative to the death of Pichegru, who was said to have been strangled
by order of the First Consul, Napoleon said that it was too absurd,
and that it would be degrading to attempt to repel it:—“What
advantage,” he observed, “could accrue to me from his death? A man of
my stamp does not act without some powerful motive. Have I ever been
known to shed blood through caprice? Notwithstanding all the efforts
that have been made to blacken my reputation and misrepresent my
character, those who know me know that crime is foreign to my nature.
There is not a private act that has occurred during the whole course
of my administration, of which I might not speak openly before a
tribunal, not only without any disadvantage, but even with some credit
to myself. The fact is that Pichegru found himself placed in a
hopeless situation; his high mind could not bear to contemplate the
infamy of a public execution; he despaired of my clemency, or
disdained to appeal to it, and put an end to his existence.

“Had I been disposed to crime,” continued the Emperor, “it is not
against Pichegru, who could do no harm, that I should have levelled
the blow, but at Moreau, who had at that moment placed me in a most
perilous situation. If the latter had unfortunately also killed
himself while in prison, my justification would have been rendered
much more difficult, on account of the great advantage it would have
been to me to get rid of him. You gentlemen who were abroad, and the
ultra-royalists who were in France, have never known the true state of
public opinion in France. Pichegru, having been once unmasked, and
exposed as a traitor to the nation, no longer excited sympathy in any
breast; and this feeling went so far that the circumstance of his
being connected with Moreau was sufficient to effect the ruin of the
latter, who saw himself abandoned by many of his adherents; for, in
the struggle of parties, the majority of the people cared more about
the commonwealth than about individuals. I judged so correctly in this
business that, when Real came to propose to me to arrest Moreau, I
rejected the proposal without hesitation. Moreau is a man of too much
importance, said I to him; he is too directly opposed to me, I have
too great an interest in getting rid of him, to expose myself thus to
the conjectures of public opinion. But, replied Real, if Moreau
conspires with Pichegru?—The case is then different; prove that to me,
shew me that Pichegru is in Paris, and I will instantly sign the order
for the apprehension of Moreau. Real had received indirect information
of Pichegru’s arrival; but had not yet been able to trace his steps.
Run to his brother’s, said I; if he has left his residence, it will be
a strong indication that Pichegru is in Paris; if he is still in his
lodgings, arrest him: his surprise will soon inform you of the truth.
This brother had been a monk, and lived in a fourth floor in Paris. As
soon as he found himself arrested, he asked, before any question was
put to him, what fault he had committed, and whether it was imputed to
him as a crime that he had received, against his will, a visit from
his brother. He had been the first, he said, to represent to him the
peril of his situation, and to advise him to go away again. This was
quite enough. Moreau’s arrest was ordered and carried into effect.
Moreau appeared at first to be under no apprehension; but, when he
found, after he had been conducted to prison, that he was arrested for
having conspired with Pichegru and Georges against the state, he was
quite disconcerted and extremely agitated. As for the greater number
of those who composed that party,” added Napoleon, “the name of
Pichegru seemed to them a triumph; they exclaimed on all sides that
Pichegru was in London, and that in a few days this would be proved;
for they either did not know that he was in Paris, or believed that it
would be easy for him to escape thence.”

The First Consul had long since broken with Moreau, who was entirely
governed by his wife. “This,” said the Emperor, “is always a great
misfortune, because a man in that case is neither himself nor his
wife, he is nothing.” Moreau shewed himself sometimes favourable to
the First Consul, and sometimes against him; sometimes obsequious and
sometimes sarcastic. The First Consul, who had wished to conciliate
the affection of Moreau, found himself under the necessity of giving
him up altogether. “Moreau,” he had said, “will in the end commit
himself most seriously; he will some day break his head against the
columns of the Palace.” And to this he was but too much instigated by
the inconsiderate conduct and the ridiculous pretensions of his wife
and his mother-in-law. The latter went so far as to contend for
precedence with the wife of the First Consul. “The Minister for
Foreign Affairs,” said Napoleon, “had been obliged once, on the
occasion of an entertainment given by the ministers, to use violence
to oblige her to desist.”

After Moreau had been arrested, the First Consul sent him word that it
would be enough for him to confess that he had seen Pichegru, in order
to put a stop to all proceedings against him. Moreau answered by a
letter, in which he assumed a high tone; but afterwards, when Pichegru
himself was arrested, and the affair began to assume a serious aspect,
Moreau wrote to the First Consul a very submissive letter, but it was
too late.

It was perfectly true that Moreau had conferred with Pichegru and
Georges; and had given the following answer to their proposals:—“In
the present state of affairs I could not do any thing for you, I could
not even depend upon my own aides-de-camp; but _get rid_ of the First
Consul, I have a party in the Senate, and shall be immediately
appointed in his stead. You, Pichegru, will be examined upon the
charge which is brought against you, of having betrayed the national
cause; depend upon it, it is necessary that you should be put upon
your trial, but I will be answerable for the result: from that moment
you will be Second Consul; and we will afterwards choose a third
according to our wish, and proceed all together in concert and without
interruption.” Georges, who was present, and whom Moreau had never
known before, very urgently claimed that third place for himself.
“That cannot be,” said Moreau, “you have no knowledge of the state of
public opinion in France; you have always been a white,[20] and you
see that Pichegru will be obliged to wash off the stain of having had
the intention to become one.” “I understand you,” said Georges, highly
incensed. “What farce are we playing here, and whom do you take me
for? You are then working for yourselves alone, and not at all for the
King? If that is the case, and if there must be a blue[21] at the head
of the government, I prefer the one who is there now.” Upon this they
separated in dudgeon, and Moreau requested Pichegru not to bring that
brute, that bull, destitute of sense and of all information, any more.

Footnote 20:

  A Royalist.

Footnote 21:

  A man of the revolutionary party.

“On the trial,” said Napoleon, “the firmness of the accomplices, the
magnanimity by which they dignified their cause, and the line of
absolute denial recommended by his advocate, saved Moreau. On being
questioned whether the charges brought against him of having held
conferences and had interviews were true, he answered, No. But the
victor of Hohenlinden was unaccustomed to falsehood; a sudden blush
suffused every feature of his countenance, and none of the bystanders
were deceived. However, he was acquitted, and most of the accomplices
were condemned to death. I pardoned several of them; all those whose
wives succeeded in penetrating into my presence, or in whose favour
strong intercessions were made, obtained their lives. The Polignacs,
M. de Riviere and others, would indubitably have perished, but for the
intervention of some fortunate circumstances. Others less known, such
as a man named Borel, Ingand de St. Maur, Rochelle, &c. were equally
fortunate. It is true,” added he, “that they did not afterwards shew
themselves very grateful for such a favour, and that, if they were
worthy to have their conduct investigated, it would be found that
their actions have not been of a nature to encourage clemency. One of
them, who had on the occasion above mentioned owed his life chiefly to
the solicitations of Murat, was precisely the same man who set a price
on Murat’s head in Provence, in the year 1815. If he thought that
fidelity should outweigh gratitude, the sacrifice must at least have
been most painful to him. Another is the man who has most contributed
to circulate the imputation, as ridiculous as that concerning Pichegru
was absurd, of the murder of the English Lieutenant Wright,[22] &c.

“In the midst of the affairs of Georges, Pichegru, and Moreau,” said
the Emperor; “that of the Duke d’Enghien happened, and rendered the
whole a strange complication.” And he then related that affair in
detail. This latter circumstance is the reason that induced me at the
time to displace and postpone to this day the whole of the article
which I now give, for I felt a very great repugnance to touch upon a
subject so painful in itself, and so afflicting to several of my
acquaintances, who had been in direct relation with the Prince, or
personally attached to him. Above all, I dreaded to awaken the
legitimate grief of a high personage, who has formerly honoured me
with some marks of kindness, of which I have ever treasured the
recollection. These are my motives; they will be understood and
appreciated. But, however, I am now approaching to the end of my work,
and my duty, as a faithful historian, imperatively commands me to take
up this melancholy subject, lest my absolute silence should be
misinterpreted. Nevertheless, I shall, for reasons before stated, omit
all the details which are already known, and which may have been read
in the works already quoted (Letters from the Cape, and Mr. O’Meara’s
work): my account would be the same, for all of them were heard from
Napoleon’s own mouth; I shall only relate a few particulars which have
not found their way into the books above mentioned, and only such as
appear to me too intimately connected with the characteristic shades
of Napoleon’s disposition, not to impose upon me the obligation of
mentioning them.

Footnote 22:

  See Letters from the Cape.

This event had made, at the time, a deep impression on my mind, as
well as on that of the inhabitants of Paris. I, perhaps, had felt it
still more forcibly on account of the principles of my childhood, the
habits and connexions of my younger days, and the line of my political
opinions; and I was, at that time, far from having got the better of
this feeling. That first impression had still remained in all its
force, and my ideas on this point were such that I certainly should
not have dared to pronounce the name of the Prince in the presence of
the Emperor: it would have seemed to me to convey the idea of a
reproach. I carried the feeling so far that, the first time I heard
him pronounce the name himself, I turned red with embarrassment.
Fortunately, I was walking behind him in a narrow path; otherwise, he
would certainly have observed my confusion. Yet, notwithstanding all
these previous dispositions on my part, the first time the Emperor
developed this affair in all its general bearings, its details, and
circumstances; when I heard him expose his various motives, with that
conciseness, brilliancy, and power of persuasion which form the
characteristics of his logic, I must confess that the affair seemed to
wear a new aspect. When he had ceased to speak, I remained surprised,
absorbed in thought; I silently called to mind my former objections; I
was angry with myself for having little or nothing to answer at this
moment, and I was obliged to confess, internally, that I found myself
stronger in feelings than in arguments or solid objections.

The Emperor often resumed this subject, which gave me an opportunity
of observing in him some very strongly marked characteristic shades. I
have, on those occasions, most distinctly and frequently seen in him
the private man struggling against the public character; and the
natural feelings of his heart contending against those which were
suggested by his pride and the dignity of his station. In the
unreserved moments of familiar intercourse, he shewed himself not
indifferent to the fate of the unfortunate Prince; but, if his
conversation had reference to public concerns, it was altogether quite
a different thing. One day, having spoken to me of the youth and the
untimely end of this ill-fated Prince, he concluded by saying: “And I
have since learnt, my dear Las Cases, that he was favourable to me. I
have been assured that he used to speak of me with some degree of
admiration; such is retributive justice in this world!” These last
words were pronounced with such an expression, every feature of his
face was so much in harmony with that expression, that I have no
doubt, if the individual whom Napoleon pitied had been at that moment
in his power, he would have been freely forgiven, whatever his acts or
intentions might have been. This was no doubt a sentiment expressed in
an unguarded moment, in which I had, as it were, taken him by
surprise; and I do not suppose that many persons have found themselves
similarly placed. This delicate subject was too sensibly connected
with Napoleon’s pride, and the peculiar cast of his mind, to allow him
to be lavish in his expression of such feelings; and he therefore
varied his arguments and his words on the subject, as the circle of
his hearers increased. We have just seen how he expressed himself in
the confidence of a private conversation; his language was even
different, when we were all assembled together: the affair, he would
then say, might have occasioned him some regret, but had not given
rise to any remorse, or even to any scruples. But when strangers were
present, he would declare that the Prince had deserved his fate.

The Emperor used to consider this affair under two very distinct
aspects: with reference to the common law, or the established rules of
justice, and with reference to the law of nature, or acts of violence.
With us he would willingly argue the matter, and generally on the
principles of common law; and he seemed to condescend to do so on
account of the familiarity that existed between us, or of his
superiority over us. He generally concluded these conversations by
observing that he might possibly be reproached with severity, but that
he could not be accused of any violation of justice; because,
notwithstanding all that calumny and falsehood had invented on the
subject, all the forms required by law had been regularly observed and
strictly attended to.

In the presence of strangers, the Emperor adopted a line of argument
founded almost exclusively on the law of nature and state politics. It
was visible that it would have been too painful to him so far to lower
himself with them as to insist much on the principles of common law:
to have done so would have appeared like an attempt to justify
himself. “If I had not had in my favour the laws of the country to
punish the culprit,” he would say to them, “I should still have had
the right of the law of nature, of legitimate self-defence. The Duke
and his party had constantly but one object in view, that of taking
away my life: I was assailed on all sides, and at every instant;
air-guns, infernal machines, plots, ambuscades of every kind, were
resorted to for that purpose. At last I was tired out, and took an
opportunity of striking them with terror in their turn in London; I
succeeded, and from that moment there was an end to all conspiracies.
Who can blame me for having acted so? What! blows threatening my
existence are aimed at me day after day, from a distance of one
hundred and fifty leagues; no power on earth, no tribunal can afford
me redress; and I shall not be allowed to use the right of nature and
return war for war! What man, unbiassed by party feeling, possessing
the smallest share of judgment and justice, can take upon himself to
condemn me? on what side will he not throw blame, odium, and criminal
accusations? Blood for blood; such is the natural, inevitable, and
infallible law of retaliation: woe to him who provokes it! Those who
foment civil dissensions or excite political commotions render
themselves liable to become the victims of them. It would be a proof
of imbecility or madness to imagine and pretend that a whole family
should have the strange privilege to threaten my existence, day after
day, without giving me the right of retaliation: they could not
reasonably pretend to be above the law to destroy others, and claim
the benefit of it for their own preservation: the chances must be
equal. I had never personally offended any of them; a great nation had
chosen me to govern them; almost all Europe had sanctioned their
choice; my blood, after all, was not ditch-water; it was time to place
it on a par with theirs. And what if I had carried retaliation
further? I might have done it: the disposal of their destiny, the
lives of every one of them, from the highest to the lowest, were more
than once offered to me; but I rejected the offer with indignation.
Not that I thought it would be unjust for me to consent to it, in the
situation to which they had reduced me; but I felt so powerful, I
thought myself so secure, that I should have considered it a base and
gratuitous act of cowardice. My great maxim has always been that, in
war as well as in politics, every evil action, even if legal, can only
be excused in case of absolute necessity: whatever goes beyond that is
criminal.

“It would have been ridiculous in those who violated so openly the law
of nations to appeal to it themselves. The violation of the territory
of Baden, of which so much has been said, is entirely foreign to the
main point of the question. The law of the inviolability of territory
has not been devised for the benefit of the guilty, but merely for the
preservation of the independence of nations and of the dignity of the
sovereign. It was therefore for the Duke of Baden, and for him alone,
to complain, and he did not; he yielded, no doubt, to violence and to
the feeling of his political inferiority: but, even then, what has
that to do with the merits of the plots and outrages which I had to
complain of, and of which I had every right to be revenged?” And he
concluded that the real authors of the dreadful catastrophe, the
persons who alone were responsible for it, were those who had favoured
and excited from abroad the plots formed against the life of the First
Consul. “For,” said he, “either they had implicated the unfortunate
Prince in them, and had thus sealed his doom; or, by neglecting to
give him intimation of what was going forward, they had suffered him
to slumber imprudently on the brink of the precipice, and to be so
near the frontiers at the moment when so great a blow was about to be
struck in the name and on the behalf of his family.”

To us, in the intimacy of private conversation, the Emperor would say
that the blame in France might be ascribed to an excess of zeal in
those who surrounded him, or to dark intrigues or private views; that
he had been precipitately urged on in this affair; that they had as it
were taken his mind unawares; and that his measures had been hastened,
and their results pre-determined. “I was one day alone,” said he, “I
recollect it well; I was taking my coffee, half seated on the table at
which I had just dined; when sudden information is brought to me that
a new conspiracy has been discovered. I am warmly urged to put an end
to these enormities; they represent to me that it is time at last to
give a lesson to those who have been day after day conspiring against
my life; that this end can only be attained by shedding the blood of
one of them; and that the Duke d’Enghien, who might now be convicted
of forming part of this new conspiracy, and taken in the very fact,
should be that one. It was added that he had been seen at Strasburg;
that it was even believed that he had been in Paris; and that the plan
was that he should enter France by the east, at the moment of the
explosion, whilst the Duke of Berry was disembarking in the west. I
should tell you,” observed the Emperor, “that I did not even know
precisely who the Duke d’Enghien was (the Revolution having taken
place when I was yet a very young man, and I having never been at
Court); and that I was quite in the dark as to where he was at that
moment. Having been informed on those points, I exclaimed that, if
such were the case, the Duke ought to be arrested, and orders should
be given to that effect. Every thing had been foreseen and prepared;
the different orders were already drawn up, nothing remained to be
done but to sign them, and the fate of the young Prince was thus
decided. He had been residing for some time past at a distance of
about three leagues from the Rhine, in the states of Baden. Had I been
sooner aware of this fact and of its importance, I should have taken
umbrage at it, and should not have suffered the Prince to remain so
near the frontiers of France; and that circumstance, as it turned out,
would have saved his life. As for the assertions, that were advanced
at the time, that I had been strenuously opposed in this affair, and
that numerous solicitations had been made to me, they are utterly
false, and were only invented to make me appear in a more odious
light. The same thing may be said of the various motives that have
been ascribed to me; these motives may have existed in the bosoms of
those who acted an inferior part on this occasion, and may have guided
them in their private views; but my conduct was influenced only by the
nature of the fact itself and the energy of my disposition.
Undoubtedly, if I had been informed in time of certain circumstances
respecting the opinions of the Prince, and his disposition; if, above
all, I had seen the letter which he wrote to me, and which, God knows
for what reason, was not delivered to me till after his death, I
should certainly have pardoned him.”

It was easy for us to perceive that these expressions of the Emperor’s
were dictated by his heart and by nature, and that they were only
intended for us; for he would have felt himself much humbled had he
supposed that any body could think for a moment that he endeavoured to
shift the blame upon some other person; or that he condescended to
justify himself. And this feeling was carried so far that, when he was
speaking to strangers, or dictating on that subject for the public
eye, he confined himself to saying that, if he had seen the Prince’s
letter, he should perhaps have forgiven him, on account of the great
political advantages that he might have derived from so doing; and in
tracing with his own hand his last thoughts, which he concludes will
be recorded in the present age, and reach posterity, he still
pronounces on this subject, which he is aware will be considered the
most delicate for his memory, that, if he were again placed in the
same situation, he should again act in the same manner!! Such was the
man, such the stamp of his mind, and the turn of his disposition.

Let those who delight in searching the human heart in its inmost
recesses, to deduce consequences and draw conclusions, now exercise
their ingenuity: I have supplied them with valuable materials, I have
laid genuine documents before them. I will add another and a last,
which will not be the least worthy of notice.

Napoleon one day said to me, with reference to the same subject, “If I
occasioned a general consternation by that melancholy event, what a
universal feeling of horror would have been produced by another
spectacle, with which I might have surprised the world!...

“I have frequently been offered the lives of those whose places I
filled on the throne, at the rate of one million a head. They were
seen to be my competitors, and it was supposed that I thirsted after
their blood; but, even if my disposition had been different from what
it was, had I been formed to commit crimes, I should have repelled all
thoughts of the crime thus proposed to me, as seeming altogether
gratuitous. I was then so powerful, so firmly seated; and they seemed
so little to be feared! Revert to the periods of Tilsit and Wagram; to
my marriage with Maria Louisa; to the state and attitude of Europe!
However, at the height of the crisis of Georges and Pichegru, when I
was assailed by murderers, the moment was thought favourable to tempt
me, and the offer was renewed, having for its object the individual,
whom public opinion, in England as well as in France, pointed out as
chief mover of all these horrible conspiracies. I was at Boulogne,
where the bearer of these offers arrived; I took it into my head to
ascertain personally the truth and the nature of the proposal. I
ordered him to be brought before me.—‘Well, Sir!’ said I, when he
appeared.—‘Yes, First Consul, we will give him up to you for one
million.‘—‘Sir, I will give you two millions; but on condition that
you will bring him alive.’—‘Ah! that I could not promise,’ said the
man, hesitating, and much disconcerted by the tone of my voice and the
expression of my looks at that moment.—‘Do you then take me for a mere
assassin? Know Sir, that, though I may think it necessary to inflict a
punishment or to make a great example, I am not disposed to encourage
the perfidy of an ambuscade;’ and I drove him from my presence. Indeed
his mere presence was already too great a contamination.”

THE SERVANT WHO HAD BEEN TAKEN AWAY FROM ME PAYS ME A SECRET
  VISIT.—HIS OFFERS.—SECOND VISIT.—THIRD VISIT.—I INTRUST TO HIM MY
  LETTER TO PRINCE LUCIEN, WHICH CAUSES MY REMOVAL FROM ST. HELENA.

From 21st to 24th.—I had remained with the Emperor the preceding day,
as late as one or two o’clock in the morning; on returning to my own
apartment, I found that I had had a visit paid to me, during my
absence, by a person who had become tired of waiting for me.

That _visit_, which my son had received, and which prudence obliged me
to insert in my journal, at the time, under the veil of mystery, may
and shall now be fully explained.

That visit was neither more nor less than the mysterious re-appearance
of the servant whom Sir Hudson Lowe had taken from me, and who,
favoured by the darkness of the night, and his knowledge of the
localities of the island, had surmounted every obstacle, avoided
sentinels, and scaled precipices, to come and see me, in order to tell
me that, having got a situation with a person who was going to set off
for London in a very few days, he came to offer me his services
without reserve. He had waited for me in my own apartment for a
considerable time, and, seeing that I did not return from the
Emperor’s, he had gone away, fearing lest he should be caught; but he
promised to return, either under pretence of visiting his sister, who
was employed in our household; or by having recourse to the same means
to which he had just resorted.

The next day, I immediately communicated my good fortune to the
Emperor, who appeared much pleased at the intelligence, and to attach
some value to the circumstance. I was very warm on the subject; I
strenuously urged that we had already been here above a year, without
having taken one single step towards the prospect of better days; on
the contrary, we were every day more and more restricted, ill used,
and tormented. We were lost in the universe; Europe was ignorant of
our real situation; it behoved us to make it known. Day after day, the
newspapers shewed us the veil of imposture which had been thrown over
us, and the impudent and disgusting falsehoods of which we were the
objects; it was for us, I urged, to publish the truth; it would find
its way to the ears of the Sovereigns, to whom it was perhaps unknown;
it would become known to the people, whose sympathy would be our
consolation, and whose indignation would, at least, revenge us upon
our cruel persecutors, &c.

We immediately began to search amongst our records. The Emperor
portioned them out, pointing out the share which each of us was to
take, in order to transcribe them with greater despatch. The day
however passed without any thing being done on the subject. The next
day (Friday), as soon as I saw the Emperor, I took the liberty of
reminding him of our plans of the preceding day; but he now appeared
to think less of the matter, and ended the conversation by saying,
“_We must see_.” This day passed like the preceding; I was on thorns.
At night, as if to add to my impatience, my man came again, and
renewed the unreserved offer of his services. I told him that I should
take advantage of them, and that he might act without scruple, as I
should not involve him in any criminality or danger. To this he
replied that he did not care about that, and that he would take charge
of any thing I might wish to give him, observing only, that he would
call for it, without fail, the day after the next (Sunday), which
would, in all probability, be the eve of his sailing. The next day
(Saturday) as soon as I saw the Emperor, I hastened to communicate to
him what I had heard from the servant, dwelling upon the circumstance
of our having only twenty-four hours more; but the Emperor, with the
utmost indifference, turned the conversation to some other topic,
totally foreign to my object. I was struck with surprise. I knew the
Emperor’s disposition, and I was perfectly satisfied that the
indifference, the sort of absence of mind, which he manifested at this
moment could not be the effect of chance, still less the result of
caprice; but what then could his motives be? This idea haunted my mind
the whole day, and rendered me melancholy and miserable. At night, the
same sentiment which agitated my breast during the day, prevented me
from sleeping. I painfully recalled to my mind every circumstance
connected with this affair, when suddenly a new light broke in upon
me. What do I require of the Emperor, thought I? that he should stoop
to the execution of trifling details too much beneath him! No doubt,
disgust and secret dissatisfaction have occasioned the silence which
has caused my uneasiness. Ought we to be useless to him? Can we not
serve him without afflicting him? And then several of his former
observations came across my mind. Had I not informed him of the
affair; had he not approved of it; what more could I expect?[23]
Henceforth it was for me to act, and I made up my mind in one instant.
I resolved to proceed in the business, without mentioning another word
to him on the subject: and, in order that it might remain more secret,
I determined to keep it entirely to myself.

Footnote 23:

  Mr. O’Meara’s work informs me, after a lapse of six years, that I
  had guessed precisely the Emperor’s feeling on this occasion.

Some months had now elapsed since I had succeeded in forwarding the
celebrated letter, in answer to Sir Hudson Lowe, concerning the
Commissioners from the Allied Powers, and which was the only document
that had been sent to Europe up to that period. The person who had
kindly taken charge of it had brought me a large piece of satin, on
part of which the letter had been written. Some was still left; and
that was precisely what I wanted. Thus every thing combined to urge me
towards the precipice, down which I was destined to fall.

As soon as daylight appeared, I gave the remainder of the satin to my
son, on whose discretion I could rely; and he spent the whole of the
day in copying upon it my letter to Prince Lucien. Night came, and,
faithful to his word, my young mulatto appeared. He had some knowledge
of the business of a tailor; he sewed with his own hands the satin
into his clothes, and took his leave of me. I promised to give him
some other things if he came to see me again before his departure, and
wished him a pleasant voyage in case I should not see him
again:—afterwards I went to bed with a light heart, and a feeling of
satisfaction, arising from the contemplation of a day well employed,
and marked by a fortunate event. I was far from thinking, at that
moment, that I had just cut with my own hands the thread of my destiny
at Longwood!

Alas! it will soon be seen that twenty-four hours had not elapsed
when, under pretence of my having written that letter, I was removed
from Longwood, and my person and papers were in the power and at the
entire disposal of the Governor, Sir Hudson Lowe. And if I should now
be asked how I could be so unguarded, and not suspect that possibly a
snare might be laid for me, I should say that my servant had appeared
to me honest, that I believed him to be faithful, and that I was still
a stranger to all idea of instigating spies, a new invention, the
honour of which the British Ministers of that period may claim as
their own, and which has since thriven so well on the continent!

             MY REMOVAL FROM LONGWOOD.—SOLITARY CONFINEMENT
              AT ST. HELENA (A SPACE OF ABOUT SIX WEEKS).

25th.—The Emperor sent for me at about four o’clock; he had just
finished work, and appeared much pleased with the result of his
occupations of the day. “I have been busy with Bertrand all day on
fortifications,” said he to me, “and the day has appeared to me very
short.” I have already said that this was a newly acquired taste of
the Emperor’s, quite of the moment; and such pastimes are valuable
here, God knows!

I had followed the Emperor to the kind of grassplot which adjoins the
tent; we thence went to the corner of the walk that leads to the
bottom of the garden. Five oranges were brought on a plate, with a
knife and some sugar. Oranges are very scarce on the island; they are
sent from the Cape. The Emperor is very fond of this fruit. These were
a present from Lady Malcolm, and the Admiral never failed to send him
some, whenever he had any. We were three of us at this moment with the
Emperor; he gave me one of these oranges to put in my pocket for my
son, and proceeded to cut the others in slices, and prepare them; and,
seated on the trunk of a tree, was eating them cheerfully, and
familiarly distributing part of them to us at the same time. By a
fatal instinct, I was precisely at that instant contemplating the
pleasure of this momentary situation! Alas! I was far from thinking
that I was then taking the last present I could receive from his
hands!...

The Emperor then took some turns in the garden; the wind had become
cold: he went into the house again, and bade me follow him alone into
the drawing-room, and the billiard-room, whilst he paced up and down
the whole extent of the two rooms. He was talking to me again about
the manner in which he had passed his day, and asked me how I had
spent mine; then, the conversation having turned on his marriage, he
was speaking of the festivities which had taken place on that
occasion, and which had ended in the terrible accident that happened
at M. Schwartzenberg’s ball. I was listening, and inwardly proposing
to make an interesting article in my journal on the subject, when the
Emperor suddenly interrupted his conversation, to observe through the
window a great number of English officers, who were advancing towards
us from the gate of our enclosure: it was the Governor, surrounded by
several of his staff. The Grand Marshal, who at this moment came into
the room, observed that the Governor had already been there in the
morning; and that he had been at his house, and remained there some
time; he added that a certain movement of the troops was spoken of.
These circumstances appeared singular; and—mark the effect of a guilty
conscience!—the idea of my letter clandestinely sent, immediately
occurred to my mind, and a secret foreboding instantly warned me that
all these strange proceedings concerned me. Such in fact, was the
case, for a few minutes afterwards, a message was brought to me,
informing me that the English Colonel, the creature of Sir Hudson
Lowe’s, was waiting for me in my own apartment. I made a sign that I
was with the Emperor, who, a few minutes afterwards, said to me, “Go,
Las Cases, and see what that animal wants of you.” And, as I was
going, he added, “_and come back soon_.” These were the last words of
Napoleon to me. Alas, I have never seen him since! but his accent, the
tone of his voice, still sound in my ears. How often since have I
taken delight in allowing my imagination to dwell upon them! and what
mingled sensations of pleasure and regret may be produced by a painful
recollection!

The Colonel who wished to see me was a man entirely devoted to the
Governor’s wishes, his factotum, and with whom I had frequently to
communicate as interpreter. I had no sooner entered the room than,
with an expression of benevolence and kindness both in his voice and
countenance, he inquired after my health with a tender interest. This
was the kiss of Judas; for, having made a sign to him with my hand to
sit down on the sofa, and having also taken a seat on it myself, he
seized this opportunity to place himself between me and the door: and,
altering at once his tone and expression, he informed me that he
arrested me in the name of the Governor, Sir Hudson Lowe, on the
deposition of my servant, who had charged me with having carried on a
secret correspondence.

My room was already guarded by dragoons, all representations on my
part became useless, I was obliged to yield to violence, and was
carried away strongly escorted. The Emperor has since written, as it
will be seen hereafter, that, on seeing me from his window, hurried
along through the plain, surrounded by armed men, the alacrity of the
numerous staff prancing about me, and the rapid undulation of their
high feathers floating in the air, had put him in mind of the
ferocious joy of the savage inhabitants of the islands of the Pacific
Ocean, dancing round the prisoner whom they are about to devour.

I had been separated from my son, who had been detained prisoner in my
apartment; but he soon joined me also under escort: so that the sudden
interruption and final termination of our communications with Longwood
date from that moment. We were both shut up in a wretched hovel, near
the former habitation of General Bertrand and his family. I was
obliged to sleep on a miserable pallet, and to make room for my poor
son by my side, lest he should have to lie on the floor; I considered
his life to be at this moment in danger, he was threatened with an
aneurism, and had been on the point of expiring in my arms a few days
before. We were kept until eleven o’clock without food; and when, in
order to supply the wants of my son, I went to the door and to each of
the windows to ask the men who guarded them for a morsel of bread,
they answered me only by presenting their bayonets.

                      MY PAPERS ARE EXAMINED, &C.

25th, 26th.—What a terrible night is the first night spent in prison,
within four walls! What ideas, what reflections, arise in the mind! My
last thought at night, and the first on waking in the morning, had
been that I was still only a few minutes’ walk from Longwood, and yet
that perhaps I was already separated from it for ever.

In the course of the morning, the Grand Marshal, accompanied by an
officer, passed within hail of my hovel. I was enabled to ask him from
my dungeon how the Emperor was. The Grand Marshal was going to the
Governor’s at Plantation House. His visit was undoubtedly on my
account, but what could be the object of his mission? What were the
ideas and the wishes of the Emperor on the subject? This occupied all
my thoughts. On passing again, on his return, the Grand Marshal, with
an expression of melancholy, made a sign to me, which gave me the idea
of bidding me adieu, and which went to my heart. In the course of the
morning, General Gourgaud and M. de Montholon also came as far as the
late residence of Madame Bertrand, which was opposite to my prison,
and not far from it. It was consolatory to me to see and to interpret
their signs of friendship and tender interest. They solicited in vain
to be allowed to come into my prison; they were obliged to return
without having succeeded. Shortly afterwards, Madame Bertrand sent me
some oranges, informing me, at the same time, that she had just
received indirectly some news of my wife, and that she was in good
health. These attentions, these demonstrations of kindness, from all
my companions, were to me a proof that the first appearance of
misfortune is sufficient to awaken the feelings of family affection,
and I found some consolation at this moment in being a prisoner.

No time had been lost in my late apartment, after my arrest: a police
officer (a recent importation into the colony, and, I presume, the
first attempt of the kind that had been made on British ground) had
made his first essay on me. He had searched my secretaire, broken open
my drawers, and seized all my papers; and, anxious to shew his
dexterity and the extent of his abilities, he had immediately set
about undoing our beds, and taking my sofa to pieces, and even spoke
of taking up the flooring.

The Governor, having got possession of all my papers, now proceeded to
produce them to me in triumph. He went into the late house of Madame
Bertrand, opposite to me, followed by eight or ten officers, and sent
to ask me whether I would go over and there be present at the
inventory which was to be made of them, or whether I preferred that he
should come to me. I replied that since he left me the option, the
latter plan would be most agreeable to me. Every body being seated, I
rose to protest most positively against the indecorous manner in which
I had been taken away from Longwood, against the illegality of sealing
up my papers in my absence, and against the violation about to be
committed on my private papers, the sacred depositories of my
thoughts, which should exist for me only, and which had remained to
this day a secret to all the world. I protested against the abuse that
might be made of their contents by power; I told Sir Hudson Lowe that,
if he thought that the circumstances of the case required that he
should examine them, he must use his own discretion; that I had no
fear of the consequences; but that I owed to myself and to general
principles to throw the responsibility of the act entirely upon him,
to yield only to violence, and not to authorize it by my consent.

These words, uttered by me in presence of all his officers, irritated
the Governor, who exclaimed, “Count Las Cases, do not render your
situation worse than it is; it is bad enough already!” alluding
probably to the punishment of death, which he often reminded us of our
being liable to, if we assisted in endeavouring to effect the escape
of the great Captive. He concluded, no doubt, that my papers would
produce the most important discoveries: God knows how far his ideas
might go on that subject.

Before Sir Hudson began to read my papers, he called General Bingham,
the second in command in the island, to assist personally in their
perusal; but that officer’s ideas of delicacy differed entirely from
those of the Governor. “Sir Hudson Lowe,” answered he, with a marked
expression of disgust, “I beg you will excuse me, I do not think that
I shall be able to read that kind of French hand-writing.”

I had, in fact, no real objection to the Governor’s examining my
papers; and I therefore told him that, not in his capacity of judge or
magistrate, for he was neither the one nor the other to me, but of my
own accord and out of pure condescension, I thought proper to allow
him to read them. He fell immediately upon my Journal. His joy and his
expectations may be imagined, when he perceived that it would inform
him, day by day, of all that happened among us at Longwood. It was
sufficiently arranged to have a table of contents, or index to the
subjects at the beginning of each month. Sir Hudson Lowe, on meeting
frequently with his name, would immediately refer to the page pointed
out in the index to read the details; and I could not help observing
to him that if he found it often necessary to use forbearance, it was
not my fault, but the fault of his own indiscretion. I assured him
that my Journal was not known to any body; that the Emperor himself,
who was the sole subject of it, had only read the first pages of it;
that its contexture was far from being settled, and that it was
intended to remain, for some time to come, a secret known to myself
only.

After Sir Hudson Lowe had spent two or three hours in looking over my
Journal, I told him that my intention had been to enable him to form a
correct idea of the nature of its contents, and that, having now done
so, I felt bound, for many reasons, to prohibit, as far as it was in
my power, his going any further; that he _could_ of course do as he
pleased, but that I should protest against the violence he would thus
exercise, and the abuse of his authority. I could easily perceive that
this was a great disappointment to him; he even hesitated: however, my
protest produced its effect, and my Journal was not touched again. I
might have extended the protest to all my other papers, but I did not
care much about them; and they were, during several days, most
minutely examined.

I had my last will sealed up: I was obliged to open it as well as
other papers equally sacred. Having got to the bottom of a portfolio
containing some things which I had not ventured to look at since my
absence from Europe, I was obliged to open them. This day was to be a
day of emotion to me: the sight of these objects awoke in my breast
some old recollections which my courage had stifled, since certain
painful separations had taken place. I was affected, and obliged to
hasten out of the room. My son, who remained in it, told me afterwards
that the Governor himself had appeared somewhat affected by this
circumstance.

                   MY REMOVAL TO BALCOMBE’S COTTAGE.

From 28th to 30th.—This day, 28th, we have been removed from our
wretched hovel to a kind of cottage belonging to Mr. Balcombe, our
former host when at Briars, and situated about a league distant. The
house was small, but very tolerable, and situated opposite to
Longwood, and at a short distance from it: we were only separated from
it by several ridges of precipices and steep summits of mountains. We
were guarded by a detachment of the sixty-sixth regiment; numerous
sentinels watched over us, and forbade the approach to our prison. An
officer was at our disposal, Sir Hudson Lowe obligingly said, and, as
he affirmed, for our convenience. All communications were strictly
intercepted; we were placed in a state of the most absolute seclusion.
On the summit of the hills which surrounded the hollow in which our
house was situated, there was a road on which we saw to-day General
Gourgaud, accompanied by an English officer. We could observe his
efforts to come as near to us as possible, and we received with
feelings of joy and affection the signs and demonstrations of
friendship which our companion addressed to us from that distance, and
returned ours to him in the same manner. The kind and excellent Madame
Bertrand sent us again some oranges: we were not allowed to write to
her to thank her, and were obliged to confine the expression of our
gratitude by sending her some roses which we had gathered in our
prison.

The next day Sir Hudson Lowe came to see us in our new residence. He
wished to know what kind of bed I had had, and I took him to the next
room and shewed him a mattress on the floor. The same kind of
attention had been bestowed upon our food. “I mention these things to
you,” said I, “because you have asked me; but, for my part, I do not
care about them.” He then grew very angry with the person to whom he
had intrusted the superintendence of our establishment here, and sent
us our meals from his own table at Plantation House, although a
distance of two leagues, and continued so to do until our wants were
regularly provided for.

It became necessary to devise some occupation in our new prison, to
enable us to bear the weight of time. I divided our hours so as to
fill up our days: I regularly gave lessons in history and mathematics
to my son; we read, and, during our intervals of leisure, we walked
about our enclosure. The place was agreeable enough for St. Helena, it
contained some verdure and a few trees. A great number of common
fowls, which were rearing for the consumption of Longwood, were kept
there, as well as some Guinea fowls, and other large birds, which we
soon rendered tame: prisoners are ingenious and compassionate. In the
evening, we used to light a fire, and then I related to my son some
family stories; I informed him of my family concerns, and mentioned to
him, and made him take down the names of those persons who had shewn
themselves kind to me during the course of my life, or had rendered me
any service. In short, our life was dull and melancholy, but so calm
that it was not devoid of a kind of pleasurable feeling. One idea
alone was exceedingly painful, and haunted us continually: the Emperor
was there almost within sight, and yet we inhabited two distinct
worlds; we were separated only by a short distance, and yet all
communication had ceased! There was something horrible in this
situation; I was no longer with him, and I was not with my family,
which I had left to follow him. What then remained to me? My son
shared in these feelings: urged by this situation, and by the
enthusiasm of youth, the dear boy offered to me, in a moment of
excitement, to take advantage of the darkness of night, to elude the
vigilance of our guards, descend the numerous precipices, and scale
the steep heights which parted us from Longwood, see Napoleon, and
bring me back some news from him, which he engaged to do before
day-light. I calmed this zeal, which, even had it rendered the attempt
practicable, would have produced no other result than a feeling of
personal satisfaction, and might have occasioned the most serious
consequences. The Emperor had conversed with me so often and so fully
that I did not suppose there was any thing he might wish to inform me
of; and if such an attempt by my son had been discovered, what a noise
it would have made, what importance would have been attached to it by
the Governor, what absurd stories he would have invented and produced!
&c.

                MY RESOLUTION.—MY LETTERS TO SIR HUDSON
                               LOWE, &C.

From Sunday December 1st, to Friday December 6th.—The days of our
imprisonment were slowly succeeding each other, and the Governor,
although he continued to visit us frequently, did not mention any
thing concerning our situation: he had merely hinted to me that my
residence in the Island and my confinement might be protracted, until
instructions were returned from London.

Eight days had nearly elapsed without producing the least approach
towards any result whatever. This state of inactivity and passiveness
could not agree with the nature of my disposition. The health of my
son was at times most alarming. Deprived of all communication with
Longwood, I was left alone to meditate by myself. I reflected upon the
situation in which I was thus placed, fixed upon a plan, and took a
resolution. I chose it, extreme in its nature, thinking that, if it
was approved by the Emperor, it might be useful, and that it would be
very easy to retrace my steps if he wished it. I therefore wrote to
the Governor the following letter:

“SIR,—In consequence of a snare laid by my servant, I was on the 25th
ultimo torn from Longwood, and all my papers were seized, for having
infringed your restrictions, to which I had previously submitted. Had
you trusted the observance of these restrictions to my word or to my
delicacy, I should have considered them as sacred; but you chose to
guard them by attaching penalties to their violation, and I chose to
run the risk of encountering them. You have applied those penalties at
your own discretion, and I have made no objection to it. All this, as
far it goes, is perfectly regular; but the measure of punishment
should not exceed the measure of the offence. What is now the case?
Two letters have been delivered for transmission without your
knowledge: one of them contains the relation of the events that have
occurred to us, written for Prince Lucien, and which would have passed
through your hands, if you had not informed me that the continuation
of my correspondence and the style of my letters would cause my
removal by you from the person of the Emperor. The other letter was
merely a letter of friendship. However, this circumstance has placed
all my papers at your disposal, you have seen them all, even to the
most secret. I have myself so much facilitated your researches that I
have consented to allow you to peruse solely upon your word, that
which was known only to myself, which is as yet a mass of undigested
ideas, undetermined, and liable at every moment to be corrected, or
modified; in a word, the secret, the chaos of my thoughts. In so doing
I have wished to convince you, and I appeal to your candour, when I
say that I hope I have convinced you that, in the multitude of papers
which you have hastily looked over, there is nothing that could be
considered as tending to interfere with the high and important part of
your functions: no plot, no plan, not even a thought relating to
Napoleon’s escape. You could not find any, because none existed. We
are of opinion that his escape is impossible, and we do not think of
it. Yet I will not deny that I should willingly have attempted to
effect it, had I seen the possibility of success. I should willingly
have sacrificed my life to restore him to liberty. I should have
fallen a martyr to my zeal, and my memory would have lived for ever in
all noble and generous hearts. But I repeat it, nobody considers the
attempt practicable; and nobody thinks of making it. The Emperor
Napoleon’s plans and wishes are still those which he formed when he
repaired _willingly and in good faith_ on board the Bellerophon, that
is, to go and seek a life of tranquillity in America, or even in
England, under the protection of the laws.

“These points settled, I protest with all my might against your
reading henceforward, I might say all my private papers, but I confine
myself to what I call my _Journal_. I owe it to the great respect
which I entertain for the august personage whose name fills its pages,
I owe it to the respect due to myself, to state my solemn objection to
your so doing. I therefore demand either that those papers may be
immediately restored to me, if you think conscientiously that their
contents are foreign to the grand object of your administration; or
if, from what you have read of them, you consider that certain parts
should be laid before the British Ministers, I demand that you will
forward them all to England, and send me with them. You, Sir, are so
often alluded to in those papers that delicacy imperatively commands
you to adopt one of those two alternatives. You cannot possibly
endeavour to avail yourself, more than I have allowed you, of this
opportunity to read in them what concerns you personally, lest you
expose yourself to the conclusions that will be drawn by induction
from this abuse of your authority, lest the circumstance be thought
connected with the trap laid for me, and with the great stir that has
been made about such a trifle. As soon as I shall have arrived in
England with these papers, I shall ask the Ministers in their turn,
and I shall appeal to the whole world, whether any importance can be
attached, in the eye of the law, to a document recording day by day,
with all the negligence warranted by strict privacy, the conversation,
the words, and perhaps even the gestures, of the Emperor Napoleon? I
shall ask them particularly whether I have not a right to demand of
them the most inviolable secrecy concerning every part of a Journal,
which is only the rough draught of my thoughts, which properly
speaking does not exist, which contains only materials yet undigested;
which I might without scruple disavow in almost every particular, as
being as yet far from being settled in my own mind, and in which it
happened to me, every day, to have to correct by the tenor of a new
conversation the errors of a former one, errors that must be
unavoidable and of frequent occurrence both with respect to the man
who speaks without knowing that he is observed, and to the man who
collects without considering himself bound to warrant the authenticity
of his information. As for what concerns you, Sir, in those pages, if
you have frequently had occasion to complain of the opinions I have
pronounced, or the facts I have stated, it is very easy to point out,
between man and man, the errors into which I may have fallen. You
cannot possibly afford me a greater pleasure than by giving me an
opportunity of being just; and whatever be the opinion in which I
persist, after your explanation, you will at least be obliged to
acknowledge my candour and sincerity. Be that as it may, Sir, and
whatever be your intentions with respect to me, I from this moment
withdraw, in as far as my present position will admit, from the state
of voluntary subjection in which I had placed myself towards you. When
I entered into that engagement, you told me that I remained at liberty
to retract it at any time; and I therefore, from the present moment,
desire to be restored to the common class of citizens. I place myself
once more under the operation of your civil laws; I appeal to your
tribunals, not to implore their favour, but their justice and their
judgment. I presume, General, that you have too much respect for the
laws, and too much innate justice in your heart, to make it necessary
for me so far to insult you as to observe, that you would become
responsible for all violations of the law that may be exercised
against me directly or indirectly. I do not suppose that the _letter_
of your instructions, which might induce you to detain me a prisoner
here or at the Cape during several months, could shelter you from the
_spirit_ of those same instructions, appealed to by the power, the
superiority, the majesty of the laws.

“Those instructions, if I have rightly understood them, in ordering
you to detain every person having belonged to the establishment at
Longwood, during a certain time before you restore them to liberty,
have only for their object, no doubt, to derange the communications
that might have been held with that horrible prison, and to let some
time elapse after their cessation. Now the manner in which I have been
torn away has been sufficient to attain that end. It was impossible
for me to bring away any idea of the moment. I was, as it were, struck
with sudden death. Besides, if I am sent to England under accusation,
and submitted to the operation of the laws, they will, if I am found
guilty, sufficiently obviate the inconvenience which it has been
sought to avoid. If I am not guilty, I shall still be exposed to the
provisions of the Alien Act; or, if that is not enough, I here give
beforehand my voluntary assent to all precautions, however arbitrary
they may be, which it may be thought proper to adopt against me on
this occasion.

“Without yet knowing, Sir, what your intentions may be with respect to
the disposal of my person, I have already imposed upon myself the
greatest of all sacrifices. I am still very near to Longwood, and
perhaps I am already separated from it by eternity; horrible thought,
that harrows up my soul, and will continue to haunt my imagination!...
But a few days ago, and you would have brought me to submit to the
greatest sacrifices, by the fear of being removed from the Emperor’s
person; to-day, it is not in your power to restore me to him. A stain
has been affixed upon me, by arresting me almost within his sight, I
can no longer be a source of consolation to him; he would only see in
me a being dishonoured, suggesting painful recollections. And yet his
presence, the attentions which I delighted to pay him, are dearer to
me than my life. But perhaps, some pity will be shewn to me from afar!
Something tells me that I shall return; but by a purified channel,
bringing with me all that is dear to my existence, to assist me in
surrounding with pious and tender cares the immortal monument placed
at the extremity of the universe, and slowly consuming by the
inclemency of the climate and the perfidy and cruelty of mankind. You
have spoken to me, Sir, of your own afflictions; we do not suspect
that you have mentioned all the tribulations with which you are
assailed; but every one knows and feels his own misery only. You do
not suspect, on your side, Sir, that you keep Longwood covered with
the veil of mourning. I have the honour,” &c.

A correspondence being once established with Sir Hudson Lowe, I did
not remain idle. The following day I wrote to him again, to tell him
that, in consequence of my letter of the preceding day, I now
officially and in due form demanded my removal from St. Helena and my
return to Europe. On the following day, I took up the same subject,
and treated it with reference to my situation, as affecting my
domestic concerns.

“In my two preceding letters,” said I to him, “both relating to my
political situation, I thought it improper and unbecoming to introduce
a single word touching my private affairs; but now that I consider
myself as belonging once more to the mass of common citizens, I do not
hesitate, as an accidental inhabitant of your island, to represent to
you all the horrors of my private situation. You are aware of the
dangerous state of my son’s health: it must have been reported to you
by the medical men. Ever since he has seen the dear and sacred tie
which bound us to Longwood dissolved, all his ideas, all his wishes,
all his hopes, are ardently turned towards Europe, and his disease
will be increased by impatience and the power of imagination. Such is
_his_ physical situation, which renders _my_ moral situation still
worse, if possible. I have to contend at one and the same time against
the feelings of my heart and the uneasiness of my mind. I cannot
consider, without a feeling of terror, that I am responsible to myself
for having brought him hither, and for being the cause of his being
detained here. What should I answer to his mother, who would ask me
for her son? What should I reply to the multitude of idlers and
others, who, though indifferent to the circumstances, are ever ready
to judge and condemn? I say nothing of my own health, it is of little
importance amidst such emotions, and such causes of anxiety. And yet,
I find myself in a most deplorable state; for, since I have no longer
before my eyes the cause which kept the faculties of my mind in
action, my body sinks under the dreadful havoc produced by eighteen
months’ struggles, agitations, and afflictions, such as the
imagination can hardly dwell upon. I am no longer near the august
personage for whom I cheerfully endured them, and I am nevertheless
also separated from my family, whose absence has caused me so much
sorrow. Deprived of both objects, my heart is torn between them; it
wanders in an abyss; it can no longer endure this situation. I leave
you, Sir, to weigh these considerations. Do not sacrifice two victims.
I request that you will send us to England, to the source of science
and of every kind of assistance. This is the first demand of any kind,
that I have made either of yourself or your predecessor. But the
deplorable state of my son’s health overpowers my stoicism; will it
not awaken your humanity? Several motives may tend to influence your
decision: they are all contained in my letter of 30th November. I
shall merely add here that an opportunity now offers for you to give a
great and rare example of impartiality, in sending thus to your
Ministers one of your adversaries.“

After having received these two letters, Sir Hudson Lowe called upon
me, and with reference to the first, he immediately denied having laid
any trap for me through the medium of my servant. He however admitted
that appearances warranted my suspicions.

Sir Hudson Lowe, afterwards, went on to discuss verbally some passages
of my letters, dwelling particularly upon certain expressions, which,
he represented to me in a friendly manner, could not but be unpleasant
to him. He found me not only on this, but on several other occasions
of the same nature, perfectly accommodating. My answer to his
observations was generally to take up the pen immediately, and erase
or modify the expressions that displeased him.

I omit a pretty voluminous correspondence upon the same subject; I
shall merely state that, in general, Sir Hudson Lowe avoided giving a
written answer, and that his custom was to come, as it has just been
seen, to converse with me respecting the letters he had just received,
and obtain some erasures, after which he retired, saying that he would
soon give a circumstantial answer: this he did not do at the time, and
has never done since; but, as I have been informed from England, he
now pays periodical papers, or occasional libellers, to abuse my work,
and to revile its author.

As, in the numerous verbal discussions to which my letters gave rise,
Sir Hudson Lowe did not, with the exception of the erasure of a few
expressions, obtain any important concession, or attain any of the
objects which he had in view; he would, on leaving me, represent me as
a man of deep cunning, and, as he affirmed, very much to be feared:
for with him a man was very cunning, very crafty, and very dangerous,
who had sense enough not to yield blindly to all his views, or to fall
into his snares. However, the following is the only trick I ever
played him. The idleness and rigour of captivity sharpen the
invention; besides, it was all fair between us: the incontestable
right of a prisoner is to endeavour to deceive his gaoler.

I said, at the beginning of this work, that the Emperor at the moment
of our departure for St. Helena, had secretly intrusted me with a
necklace of diamonds of very considerable value.

The habit of carrying it about me for such a length of time had
brought me to think no more about it, so that it was only after
several days of seclusion, and quite by chance, that I thought of it.
Closely watched as I was, I could not see any possibility of being
able to restore it to the Emperor, who had no doubt forgotten it as
well as myself. After having thought a great deal on the subject, I
contrived to make use of Sir Hudson Lowe himself for that purpose. I
requested to be allowed to bid my companions farewell, and wrote the
following letter to the Grand Marshal:—

”SIR,—Torn from the midst of you all, left to myself, deprived of all
communication whatever, I have been obliged to found my decisions on
my own judgment and my own feelings. I have addressed them officially
to Sir Hudson Lowe, on the 30th of November. In return for the liberty
which I am allowed, I abstain from saying a single word about it, and
rely upon the delicacy of the high authorities to communicate to you
the whole of my letter, if any part of it should ever be mentioned or
alluded to—I resign myself to my fate.

“It only remains for me to request you will lay at the Emperor’s feet
the assurance of my respect, veneration, and affection: my life is
still entirely devoted to him. I shall never enjoy any happiness but
near his august person.

“In the unfortunate state of penury to which you are all reduced, I
should have most ardently wished to leave behind me some of my wife’s
jewels ... a necklace ... the widow’s mite! But how shall I venture to
offer it?... I have often made the offer of the four thousand louis
which I possess in England at my disposal, that offer I now again
renew; my position, whatever it be, cannot produce any alteration in
my intention. I shall henceforward be proud to be in want! Once more,
Sir, assure the Emperor of my entire devotion to his person, of my
fidelity and unshaken constancy....

“And you, my dear companions of Longwood, let me ever live in your
recollection! I know the privations and afflictions to which you are
exposed; and my heart bleeds for you. With you, I was of little
importance; far from you, you shall know my zeal and my tender
solicitude, if they have humanity enough to allow me to exercise them.
I embrace you all very affectionately, and request you will add for
yourself, Sir, the assurance of my respect and consideration.

“P.S. This letter has been ready for you some time; it was written
when I thought I was going to be removed hence. To-day the Governor,
in giving me permission to send it to you, informs me that I am to
wait here, until answers shall have arrived from England. Thus I shall
be for months at St. Helena, and yet Longwood will cease to exist for
me; a new species of torment which I had not thought of!”

Sir Hudson Lowe, to whom I delivered this letter open, for such was
his condition, read it, approved it, and was kind enough to undertake
to deliver it himself, a circumstance which had the effect of exciting
the Emperor’s attention, and which contributed, in a great measure,
though indirectly, to cause the deposit to be restored to Napoleon.

A register was made of all letters from my London friends, in order to
ascertain in the public offices whether any had arrived by indirect
modes of conveyance. I had commenced a second letter to Prince Lucien;
the Governor laid particular stress upon it. It was in vain I
represented to him that it was full of erasures, and crowded with
pencil notes almost effaced; that it had not been written, and did not
therefore exist in reality; that I might disown it without scruple;
that it was impossible to make any _legal_ or _honest_ use of it: he
persisted in having some parts of the letter copied; God knows for
what purpose!

He was much puzzled by a note of the Lieutenant-Governor’s lady. On
quitting St. Helena for England, she had told us that the law forbade
her taking charge of any letter; but that she would have great
pleasure in being useful to us in any other way. I had sent to her,
for my London friends, some articles which had been used by the
Emperor, or which had come from himself. A small silver inkstand, I
believe, some words in his hand-writing, perhaps some of his hair; I
know not what. These I called precious relics. Mrs. Skelton had
replied that she would treat them with all the respect they deserved,
but that she must confess to me she had not been able to resist the
temptation of taking a small portion of them.

Sir Hudson Lowe could not account for my being either unable or
unwilling to state what those precious objects were. I should be
mortified if they should have brought any disagreeable consequences on
this lady. I had merely kept the note in memory, and in token of
respect for her. Mr. and Mrs. Skelton were a moral and virtuous
couple, whom we had much injured, though undoubtedly against our wish;
but their politeness and attention to us had constantly increased with
the harm we did them. Our arrival in the island had caused their being
dispossessed of Longwood, losing their situation, and being sent back
to Europe, where they must be without a provision.

At last, after a time, the famous clandestine documents came out in
their turn: my letter to Prince Lucien, and the one to my London
acquaintance. Sir Hudson Lowe had caused them to be carefully copied,
but with many chasms, from not having been able to read all, certain
words being found effaced upon the satin, owing to the documents
having been accidentally wetted since I had parted with them. I
carried my complaisance and good nature so far as to restore them; and
then a sort of interrogatory commenced.

The Governor’s attention was much engaged by two points, which he had
it deeply at heart to clear up, if, he said, I had no objection to it.
The first question was relative to these words of my letter to Prince
Lucien: “Those who surround us complain bitterly that their letters
are falsified in the public papers,” &c. It was asked of me who these
persons were. The Aide-de-camp held his pen to take down my answers. I
desired he would write that, seeing no inconvenience in answering, I
would do so, but entirely of my own accord; for that, if the Governor
thought to question by virtue of his authority, I should be silent;
and I then said, “that those words of my letter were vague, general,
and without any application whatever; that they were what had been
said to us by every one, when they sought to console us for the very
improper expressions or descriptions regarding us, which we
occasionally found in the London papers, under the date of St.
Helena.”

The Governor’s second question applied to my private letter. It
contained, amongst others, a request to ask Lord Holland whether he
had received the parcels I had directed to him. Sir Hudson Lowe
inquired what those parcels were, and by whom I had forwarded them,
&c.; and here he visibly redoubled the mildness of his deportment, in
order to obtain a satisfactory answer, confessing that he had no right
to compel me to reply; but it would be, he said, the means of
materially expediting and simplifying my own affair, &c. I replied,
rather in a solemn manner, that this point was my _secret_, which
evidently created an impression upon the physiognomy of Sir Hudson
Lowe; and, my words being taken down as I uttered them, I continued to
dictate, adding that the answer I had just given was only that which
my education and habits prompted me to give, that any other might have
given rise to the Governor’s doubts, and that it was not proper I
should expose the veracity of my words to the smallest suspicion;
that, after this preliminary statement, however, I had no longer any
objection to declare that I never, in all my life, had any
communication with Lord Holland. This unexpected conclusion was a
_coup de théâtre_, quite a comedy-scene; it would be difficult to
describe the surprise of the Governor, the astonishment of the
officers; the pen stopped in the writer’s hand. Sir Hudson Lowe did
not hesitate to reply that he fully believed me, but that he must
confess he could not understand the business at all. I confessed, in
my turn, that I could not help laughing at the perplexity I caused
him, but that I had told him all. The fact is, I had intended, when my
servant should return, to intrust him besides with several authentic
documents upon our situation, for Lord Holland: but I had not been
allowed time for so doing; they had come too soon to take me away. I
had the honour of knowing his Lordship only by the nobleness and
dignity of his public conduct; but to transmit the truth to him, as an
hereditary legislator of his country, and a member of the supreme
court of Great Britain, appeared to me very proper in us both, and
equally becoming and serviceable to the honour of the British
character.

                MY ANXIETIES.—A LETTER FROM THE EMPEROR,
                            A REAL BLESSING.

16th.—More than twenty days had elapsed, and nothing as yet announced
any change in our dreadful situation. My son’s illness continued to
exhibit the most alarming symptoms; my health was visibly declining
through grief and anxiety. Our confinement was so strict that we had
not yet heard a single word from Longwood; I was quite ignorant how my
unfortunate affair had been interpreted there; I had merely learnt
that the Emperor had not left his apartment during the last fifteen or
eighteen days and had almost always taken his meals there alone. What
did I not suffer from these circumstances! The Emperor had evidently
been affected, but in what manner? Shall I own it? this doubt was, to
me, a source of absolute torment; it haunted me at every moment since
I had quitted Longwood: for the Emperor was perfectly ignorant of the
cause of my being carried off; fate had so ordained it. What would he
have thought, on hearing about my clandestine letters? What would have
been his opinions, what motive would he assign to my disguise towards
him; I, who from habit, would not have stirred a step, or hazarded an
expression, without communicating with him? I coupled these faults,
which I even exaggerated, with the affecting kindness of the last
moments I had passed with him. Some minutes before I was torn away
from him, he was more cheerful towards me, seemed even better disposed
than usual; and, some moments later, he had perhaps been led to find
something mysterious in my conduct. The appearance of the right of
reproach and of doubt had perhaps already risen in his mind. This idea
grieved me more than I could express, and visibly affected my health.
Fortunately, the Governor came to restore me to life. He presented
himself towards evening, appearing much taken up with what he had to
tell me, and, after a long preamble, which it was difficult for me to
understand, he concluded by informing me, that he held in his hand a
letter, which my situation gave him the right to withhold from me; but
that he knew how dear to me was the hand that wrote it, how much I
valued the sentiments which it expressed, and that he was, therefore,
going to shew it to me, notwithstanding the many personal motives he
might have for not doing so! It was a letter from the Emperor!

Whatever harm Sir Hudson Lowe may have done to us, whatever his
motives may have been, at this moment, I owe him a real obligation for
the happiness he afforded me; and, when I recollect it, I am tempted
to reproach myself for many details and certain imputations; but I
owed them to truth, and to considerations of the highest importance. I
shewed myself so much affected that he appeared to be moved by it, and
consented to my request of being allowed to take a copy of what was
strictly personal in the letter. My son copied it in a hurry, so much
did we dread lest he should alter his mind; and when he left us, we
re-copied it in many ways and in many places; we even learnt it by
heart, so great was our fear that the night’s reflections might
occasion Sir Hudson Lowe to repent. And, in fact, when he re-appeared
the next morning, he expressed to me his regret on the subject; and I
did not hesitate to offer to return to him the copy I had taken,
assuring him that I should not feel the less grateful. We had ensured
to ourselves the means of being generous without inconvenience.
Whether he suspected that such was the case, or whether from a
continuation of the same kindness, I know not; but he declined my
offer. I shall now lay before the reader that letter, the original of
which was kept by Sir Hudson Lowe, which he gave me his word should
share the same fate as my other papers, and which I nevertheless had
all possible trouble to obtain, when the English Government, after
Napoleon’s death, thought that they could not avoid restoring my
Journal to me. I shall transcribe here those passages of the letter
which Sir Hudson Lowe allowed me to copy at the time, and such as they
were published after my return to Europe; those parts which he kept
back are thrown into the notes, at the bottom of the pages: the two
together will form the whole of the original.

“My dear Count de Las Cases,—My heart is deeply affected by what you
now experience. Torn from me a fortnight ago, you have been ever since
closely confined, without the possibility of my receiving any news
from you, or sending you any; without having had any communication
with any person, either French or English; deprived even of the
attendance of a servant of your own choice.

“Your conduct at St. Helena has been, like the whole of your life,
honourable and irreproachable; I have pleasure in giving you this
testimony.

“Your letter to one of your friends in London contains nothing
reprehensible; you merely disburden your heart into the bosom of
friendship.

              [_Half the letter was wanting here._[24]]

Footnote 24:

  “This letter is similar to eight or ten others, which you have
  written to the same person, and which you have sent unsealed. The
  Governor having had the indelicacy to pry into the expressions which
  you confide to friendship, has latterly reproached you with them,
  threatening to send you out of the island, if your letters continued
  to be the bearers of complaints against him. He has thus violated
  the first duty of his situation, the first article of his
  instructions, the first sentiment of honour; he has thus authorized
  you to seek for means to open your heart to your friends, and inform
  them of the guilty conduct of this Governor. But you have been very
  simple; your confidence has been easily beguiled!

  “A pretext was wanting to seize upon your papers; but your letter to
  your friend in London could not authorize a visit from the police to
  you; since it contained no plot, no mystery: since it was only the
  expression of a heart noble and sincere. The illegal and precipitate
  conduct observed on this occasion bears the stamp of a base feeling
  of personal animosity.

  “In countries the least civilized, exiles, prisoners, and even
  criminals, are under the protection of the laws and of the
  magistrates; those persons who are intrusted with the keeping of
  them have superior officers in the administration who watch over
  them. On this rock, the man who makes the most absurd regulations,
  executes them with violence, and transgresses all laws; there is
  nobody to check the outrages of his passions.

  “The Prince Regent can never be informed of the acts carried on
  under his name; they have refused to forward my letters to him; they
  have, in a violent manner, sent back the complaints made by Count
  Montholon; and Count Bertrand has since been informed that no
  letters would be received if they continued to be libellous as they
  had hitherto been.

  “Longwood is surrounded by a mystery which it is sought to render
  impenetrable, in order to conceal a guilty line of conduct which is
  calculated to create a suspicion of the most criminal intentions!!!

  “By reports insidiously circulated, it is endeavoured to deceive the
  officers, the travellers, the inhabitants, of this island, and even
  the agents whom, it is said, Austria and Russia have sent hither. No
  doubt the English Government is deceived, in like manner, by artful
  and false representations.

  “They have seized your papers, amongst which, they know there were
  some belonging to me, without the least formality, in the room next
  to mine, with a ferocious _eclat_ and manifestation of joy. I was
  informed of it a few moments afterwards, and looked from the window,
  when I saw that they were hurrying you away. A numerous staff was
  prancing round the house; me thought I saw the inhabitants of the
  Pacific Ocean dancing round the prisoner whom they are about to
  devour.”

“Your company was necessary to me. You are the only one that can read,
speak, and understand English. How many nights you have watched over
me during my illnesses! However, I advise you, and if necessary, I
order you, to demand of the Governor of this country to send you to
the Continent; he cannot refuse, since he has no power over you, but
by virtue of the act which you have voluntarily signed. It will be a
great source of consolation to me to know that you are on your way to
more favoured climes.

“Once in Europe, whether you proceed to England or return home,
endeavour to forget the evils which you have been made to suffer; and
boast of the fidelity which you have shewn towards me, and of all the
affection I feel for you.

“If you should, some day or other, see my wife and son, embrace them
for me; for the last two years, I have had no news from them, either
directly or indirectly.

            [_Three or four lines were wanting here._[25]]

Footnote 25:

  “There is in this country a German botanist, who has been here for
  the last six months, and who saw them in the gardens of Shoenbruna,
  a few months before his departure. The barbarians have carefully
  prevented him from coming to give me any news respecting them.”

“In the mean time be comforted, and console my friends. My body, it is
true, is exposed to the hatred of my enemies; they omit nothing that
can contribute to satisfy their vengeance; they make me suffer the
protracted tortures of a slow death; but Providence is too just to
allow these sufferings to last much longer. The insalubrity of this
dreadful climate, the want of every thing that tends to support life,
will soon, I feel, put an end to my existence.

            [_Four or five lines were wanting here._[26]]

“As there is every reason to suppose that you will not be allowed to
come and see me before your departure, receive my embrace, and the
assurance of my friendship. May you be happy!

                                           “Yours,

                                                           “NAPOLEON.”

“_Longwood; 11th December, 1816._” */

Footnote 26:

  “The last moments of which will be an opprobrium to the English
  name; and Europe will one day stigmatize with horror that perfidious
  and wicked man; all true Englishmen will disown him as Briton.”

           REFLECTIONS ON THE EMPEROR’S LETTER.—NEW OBSTACLES
                      STARTED BY SIR HUDSON LOWE.

From Tuesday, Dec. 17th, to Thursday 19th, 1816.—The Emperor’s letter
proved a source of real consolation to me. It was continually present
in my thoughts; it dissipated my alarms, strengthened my resolution,
and in short it rendered me truly happy. I read it carefully over and
over again. I weighed every word it contained. From my own knowledge
of the Emperor, I thought that I could guess how he had been induced
to write it. I could conceive what would be his uneasiness respecting
the cause of my removal, and his surprise on hearing of the
clandestine correspondence. From his constant habit of considering
things in every possible point of view, I felt convinced that his
penetration had enabled him to discover precisely what had taken
place, and that he had determined to write to me in consequence. My
conjectures on all these points proved to be correct: for I afterwards
learned that the Emperor, after some delay, had determined to write to
me, without knowing what might be the nature of the papers which had
caused my arrest.

Need I say how dearly I prized this letter! I who had so frequently
heard the Emperor declare that he would not write to his wife, his
mother, or his brothers, since he could not do so without having his
letters opened and read by his jailers. But the letter to me had been
opened with his own consent and with his own hands; for, after it was
sent to Sir Hudson Lowe by the officer on guard, it was returned with
the observation that it could not be delivered to me until it should
be read and approved by the Governor. The Emperor was reclining on his
sofa at the moment when the letter was brought back to him, with this
new obstacle. He uttered not a word, but raising his hand over his
head, he took the letter, broke the seal, and immediately returned it,
without even looking at the person who had presented it.

Another circumstance which rendered this letter valuable in my eyes
was that it bore the Emperor’s full signature; and I knew how much he
disliked to sign his name at length, in the new circumstances in which
he was placed. This, I believe, was the first time he had signed his
name at full length since he had been at St. Helena, and, from an
inspection of the original, it is easy to perceive that it cost him
some degree of consideration. At first he wrote with his own hand,
merely the date: “_Longwood, December 11, 1816_,” concluding with his
usual cipher. But, conceiving this to be insufficient, he added, lower
down: “_your devoted Napoleon_,” repeating his cipher. The whole bears
evident traces of having been written under feelings of
embarrassment.[27]

Footnote 27:

  This letter was written by one of Napoleon’s suite; but the Emperor
  himself, with his own hand, marked the punctuation. I have mentioned
  in a former part of my Journal that, in his writing, the Emperor was
  perfectly careless of orthography; yet it is singular that, in the
  letter here alluded to, he has himself corrected the slightest
  errors.

But the greatest satisfaction which the Emperor’s letter afforded me
was that it pointed out precisely the course which I had previously
determined on adopting. “I _entreat_ you, and in case of urgency, I
_command_ you, to quit the island,” said the Emperor: and this was
exactly what I had resolved to do, during the first days of my
seclusion, while separated from all my friends, and having no
counsellor but myself. I can no longer, I thought, be of any great
service to the Emperor here; but I may, perhaps, be useful to him
elsewhere. I will go to England, and appeal to the Ministers. They
cannot suspect my conduct to be premeditated; seeing that I have been
snatched, as it were, from sudden death. Whatever I say will evidently
come from my heart. I will paint the truth, and they cannot but be
touched with the miseries I shall unfold to them. They will ameliorate
the condition of the illustrious captive, and I will myself return and
lay at his feet the consolation which my zeal will have procured.

I therefore resumed my prayers and entreaties; and a circumstance
which the more induced me to do so was that my son had just then been
seized with a relapse, and had been for half an hour in a state of
insensibility, without any other assistance than I was capable of
affording him. My distress and anxiety may be easily conceived; and I
was myself very much indisposed. I wrote a letter to the Governor, in
which I said:—“You reduce me to the utmost possible misery. What a
terrible responsibility you are taking upon yourself! You are a
father; and alarms like those which now distress me may, perhaps, one
day remind you of my unavailing entreaties.” It was evident that, by
detaining us, he was hurrying us to our graves. I was unable to
conceive what could induce him thus to involve himself in new
difficulties; it appeared to me most natural that he should prefer
letting us die elsewhere.

Sir Hudson Lowe called that very day. He said that the note he had
received respecting my son’s health was the occasion of his visit. He
had sent for Dr. Baxter, who arrived soon after him.

In the course of a long conversation, I could very well discern that
Sir Hudson Lowe had now some secret object in view with respect to me.
We reciprocally sounded each other on various points; and the Governor
concluded by observing that he could not send me back to England,
because I insisted on carrying my Journal along with me; while, on the
other hand, it was claimed by the Emperor, as it had been written by
his order. The cunning and absurdity of this reasoning were
sufficiently obvious. Then, as if seized by a sudden thought and a
momentary feeling of condescension, he added that, if I wished to
return to Longwood, he would very willingly agree to it. I trembled to
hear this.... However, recollecting the letter and the significant
words of the Emperor, I replied that, though the idea of returning to
Longwood was wholly contrary to my present intention, yet, if the
Emperor expressed a desire to that effect, I should immediately change
my resolution. Sir Hudson Lowe observed that he had good reason to
believe the Emperor did wish for my return. The Governor’s thoughts
were evidently occupied with some new scheme or other respecting me;
but I could not guess what it was. I signified that it would be
necessary for me to write to Longwood, to learn what were the
Emperor’s wishes. To this the Governor did not positively object, but
he expressed himself with the utmost obscurity. At length he departed;
at least I supposed him gone. He had, however, merely withdrawn for a
time, to hold a conference with his confidential officer; after which
he came to inform me that, having considered the business, he thought
it advisable for me to write to the Grand Marshal on the subject of my
return to Longwood, at the same time observing that, according to the
manner in which I might express myself in my letter, the Emperor would
or would not be induced to signify a wish for my return. This was very
certain, and I could not but smile at the observation.

             OFFICIAL DECISION RESPECTING MY REMOVAL TO THE
                   CAPE.—CONDUCT OF SIR HUDSON LOWE.

20th, 21st.—Sir Hudson Lowe, harassed by my incessant appeals to him,
and perplexed by the awkward situation in which he had placed himself,
began apparently to repent of having made so much noise about so
trifling a matter. He evidently wished to see me return to the
Emperor, which of course would have relieved him of all embarrassment,
and would have put an end to the whole business. Consequently, with
the view of inducing me the more speedily to adopt this step, the
Governor addressed to me the official decision respecting my removal
to the Cape of Good Hope; and this document he accompanied by a letter
in which he once more mentioned, in very studied language, the
facility he afforded me of returning to Longwood. I have avoided, as
far as possible, inserting the documents connected with this
correspondence, and have abridged several of my own letters through
the fear of fatiguing the reader. However, it is proper that I should
produce all that is necessary for the explanation of this affair, and
I therefore subjoin the official decision, and the letter to which I
have just alluded.

                              DECLARATION.

“The Governor having duly considered all the circumstances, relative
to the affair of Count Las Cases, has adopted the following decision:—

“Count Las Cases having committed a direct and premeditated violation
of the regulations established at St. Helena, by virtue of the
authority of the British Government, relative to General Bonaparte, in
corrupting the fidelity of an inhabitant of the island, so far as to
render him, in a criminal and underhand way, the bearer of secret and
clandestine letters for Europe; and having thus broken one of the
indispensable conditions to which he voluntarily acquiesced when he
signed his declaration to obtain leave to reside at St. Helena, the
said Count Las Cases has been separated from the person of General
Bonaparte; and, in conformity with the instructions of the British
Government, he will be transported to the Cape of Good Hope.

“Count Las Cases is permitted to take with him all his property and
papers, excepting, however, such of the latter as may have reference
to General Bonaparte, since the time he has been under the authority
of the British Government, and also such correspondence as may not
have passed through the official channel of the English authorities.

“The Governor will await the orders of the British Government
respecting those papers, the nature of which may be the subject of
dispute.

                                       (_Signed_)       “HUDSON LOWE.”

“_Plantation House, Dec. 20, 1816._” */ #/

             LETTER FROM SIR HUDSON LOWE, WHICH ACCOMPANIED
                        THE PRECEDING DOCUMENT.

“SIR,—In communicating to you the enclosed decision, permit me to
mention, what I have already stated verbally, that I shall make no
objection to your remaining on the island, if you prefer to do so,
rather than proceed to the Cape of Good Hope, there to wait until I
receive instructions from the British Government respecting you.

“In case you should prefer remaining at St. Helena, I conceive it
necessary to require from you a declaration, expressing your wish to
that effect, and a promise to submit to the same restrictions under
which you have hitherto been permitted to reside here.

“Thus, Sir, it is entirely at your own option, either to proceed to
the Cape of Good Hope, or to remain here, with your papers under seal,
until I shall receive instructions from Government.

                               “I have the honour to be, &c.

                                      (_Signed_)        “HUDSON LOWE.”

I immediately acknowledged the receipt of these two documents, at the
same time requesting an acknowledgment of the receipt of all my
letters, for as yet I had had no intimation of any one of them having
been received. Wishing to reply to the Governor’s offer of allowing me
to return to Longwood, I instantly addressed a letter on this subject
to the Grand Marshal, which I sent to Sir Hudson Lowe, in order that
he might peruse it, and forward it to its destination.

It will scarcely be credited that Sir Hudson Lowe sent back this
letter. He had drawn a pencil mark across every passage to which he
objected, and had reduced the whole to a few lines, thus assuming the
privilege of dictating to me what I was to write to Count Bertrand.
The returned letter was accompanied by a communication, which the
Governor observed would serve as an answer to all my preceding
correspondence.

          CORRESPONDENCE CONTINUED.—THE GOVERNOR DISCONCERTED
                       BY MY FINAL DETERMINATION.

22nd, 23rd.—The Governor came to ascertain the effect of his
declaration and his two letters. He doubted not that they had produced
a great impression, and he calculated on finding my letter to the
Grand Marshal ready written, with the corrections he had suggested;
which communication, he expected would bring about my return to
Longwood. But I coolly informed him that, since he had taken upon
himself to dictate to me, I would not write at all. At this, he
appeared surprised and disconcerted, and, after some reflection, he
went so far as to inquire whether the corrections which he had made
were the only obstacles that deterred me. This unusual condescension
on his part was a sufficient guide for me. I therefore continued firm;
and cut the matter short by observing that, in the evening, he should
receive from me my irrevocable determination and the reasons on which
it was grounded, together with my remarks on the different letters
which he had addressed to me.

My letter was as follows:—

“SIR,—You have sent back to me, with your corrections, the letter
which I wrote to Count Bertrand, respecting your verbal offer of
granting me permission to return to Longwood. But as it almost always
happens here, this offer was sincere only in appearance, and it was
doomed to expire in the details of its execution. I was not much
surprised at this. After your departure, the other day, when I came to
reflect on the offer you had made, I foresaw that the matter would
terminate as it really has done. You had the candour to tell me that
you could not permit me and the individuals at Longwood to combine our
ideas; or, in other words, to ascertain our _real wishes_. You have,
doubtless, very good reasons for this. I say nothing against it; only
I cannot suffer myself to be duped, or to be the means of leading into
error those who take an interest in my fate.

“You are too advantageously situated, Sir, between Longwood and me;
and if I must write to Count Bertrand, not my own sentiments, but what
you may think proper to dictate, I decline holding any communication
with him. I shall regard your offer as never having been made, because
it cannot possibly be accepted; and I must refer irrevocably for my
thoughts, sentiments, and decisions on this subject, to my letter of
the 30th of November.

“You mistake, Sir, if you suppose that I wished for answers to all the
arguments and articles contained in my letters. I am aware of the
importance of your occupations, and the value of your time, and
therefore I merely requested an acknowledgment of the receipt of my
letters for the sake of regularity. I presumed you could have no
reason to refuse this.

“You seem surprised, Sir, at the deplorable state of my own and my
son’s health; and you twice express astonishment that I should not
have complained to you on the subject, when I was at Longwood. I
thought but little about my health, Sir, when I was at Longwood; and
besides, when I felt indisposed, I considered it more advisable to
complain to the Doctor than to the Governor. With regard to my son, I
am surprised you should have heard nothing of his situation,
considering the consultations that have been held on his case, the
fits he has had, and the many times he has been bled. Is it to be
wondered at if our present circumstances increase our infirmities?

“I now come to your order for my removal to the Cape. I find that all
the papers which have any reference to the august individual to whom I
have devoted my existence are to be detained. What other papers, Sir,
can I be possessed of? What is meant by saying that I am free to carry
away all the rest? Is not this making an offer, and yet granting
nothing?

“You detain my Journal, the sole and real object of all this
misunderstanding; the depository, yet incomplete and incorrect, in
which I daily registered all that I thought, saw, or heard. Can any of
my papers be more valuable to me than this? You cannot pretend to have
been ignorant of its contents, since I suffered you to peruse it for
two hours at your own discretion. Will you not be responsible for
having abused this privilege? Will you not, perhaps, one day, have to
justify yourself for the false notions which you have doubtless
transmitted to the English Ministers respecting this manuscript? You
have called it a _Political Journal_. I had no right, you have
observed, in the situation in which I was placed, to keep any account
of what was said by the Emperor Napoleon, and you particularly object
to my having introduced official documents into my Journal. As if all
that I saw, read, and heard, did not by right, and without
impropriety, belong to my own thoughts, and form a part of my own
property, so long as the record was kept private and secret! Who would
suppose that such principles could have been imbibed amidst the
liberal ideas of England? Do they not rather partake of the odious
police maxims of the continent? And, after all, what are the contents
of this Journal? It describes the sublime language and conduct of the
august individual who is the object of it, the incidents of his life,
and also many things which are probably not very agreeable to you! But
who will have given publicity to these facts? The whole was to have
been re-touched, altered, and corrected. Who has prevented this?
However, Sir, you may rest assured, that the circumstances which have
just taken place shall never induce me to say any thing concerning you
which I do not firmly believe to be true.

“In your decision of the 20th of October, you declare that I shall be
removed from Longwood, and sent to the Cape of Good Hope. From the
form and language of this decision, it might naturally be supposed
that it was hostile to my wishes; while, in reality, you thereby
pronounce a sentence which is now, and has been for many days past,
foreign to the new question that has risen up between us. You remove
from Longwood one who, twenty days ago, withdrew from the subjection
to your authority in which he had voluntarily placed himself; and who,
for the last eighteen days, has been formally demanding his removal
from the island. Who would ever guess these facts from a perusal of
your document? You enclose your decision in a letter, in which you
leave me the choice of submitting to your sentence or returning to
Longwood. But by embracing the happiness which you thus hold out to
me, I should secure to you the triumph and satisfaction of being
master of my most private papers; I should again become your captive,
and should be liable to the same searches and seizures, whenever you
might be pleased to make them.... No, Sir! I can make no choice. I can
only repeat what I have already said before. I resign myself to the
laws. If I am guilty, let me be tried; if I am not guilty, restore me
to liberty. If my papers are unconnected with this affair, return them
to me. If you think it proper to submit them to serious examination,
transmit them to the English Ministers, and let me be sent with them.
Besides, as my own and my son’s health imperatively require every kind
of medical assistance, I earnestly implore you to send us to England.

“Nothing was more simple than this affair, and yet it has been
involved in difficulty. In vain you refer to your instructions; they
never can be made to apply to cases so peculiar as this. Your own
wavering determination proves to me that your instructions are neither
clear nor precise. You wished at first to keep me on the island in
solitary confinement and separated from Longwood; you did not think it
right to send me to the Cape. You now torture the literal meaning of
your instructions, in order to give them a forced interpretation. But
recollect that you will be held responsible to your Government for
having misconstrued them, and to me for having violated the law in my
person. Recollect that most of your measures will ultimately appear to
have been vexatious and arbitrary acts. I know not what rights, what
resources, your laws will afford me; but I slumber in this ignorance;
for I trust they will protect me in some way or other. You expect to
be rid of me when I shall be removed to the Cape, separated from my
papers, which you intend to detain in your possession. But even should
I be kept a prisoner there, the winds shall waft my complaints
hitherward. I will make known the mental wounds and bodily sufferings
which you will thus have been the means of aggravating; for, if I
should be detained at the Cape, it must be through you, either by your
direct orders or secret instructions. Sealed papers cannot be opened
except in the presence of the party interested. Will you have me
brought back from the Cape, for the purpose of breaking the seals that
are affixed to mine? Or will you detain me at the Cape until you
receive orders to send my papers to England? What object is to be
gained by all this? There was, and still is, a simple mode of
arranging every thing! My natural disposition to accommodate made me,
as it were, anticipate every difficulty. I was ready to obviate all. I
would willingly have subjected myself in England to any preliminary
measures, however arbitrary, that might have been equivalent to the
quarantine of the Cape. The state of my own and my son’s health was a
valid reason for so doing.

“The fear of departing from the literal meaning of any particular
point in your instructions has, with you, been more powerful than the
necessity and the right of yielding to their spirit, to the force of
circumstances, and the feelings of humanity. It is not yet too late to
grant what I solicit. I am willing to believe that humanity will
determine you; and if so I shall remain your debtor. The circumstance
of the papers being claimed at Longwood and by me cannot be regarded
as a reasonable obstacle. Besides, it may be asked what you have done
to remove it? Do you wish that I should myself write on the subject?
Three words would suffice to bring us to an understanding.

“At all events, Sir, whatever determination you may come to, whatever
vexation you may reserve for me, nothing can be comparable to what I
suffer in being detained on this horrible island, separated from the
august individual whom I followed hither. The hours and minutes that I
pass in this situation are like years in my unfortunate life, and
dangerously aggravate my son’s precarious state of health. I therefore
again demand, and shall incessantly demand, that you will remove me
from this hated place. I am,” &c.

The Governor was very much vexed by my determination of not returning
to Longwood, though I could not exactly guess the reason why. However,
my resolution was fully confirmed on the following day, when he came
to me, and, after a long and very obscure preamble, respecting his
sincerity and good intentions, he told me that, to facilitate my
communication with Longwood, he would consent to forward my first
letter to Count Bertrand, in the form in which I had myself written
it; and moreover to send along with it a copy of all my
correspondence; a thing which he had hitherto constantly refused to
do. But the more he made concessions, the more firmly I rejected
them:—“’Tis too late,” said I, “the die is cast. I have pronounced
sentence upon myself. I will not write to Longwood, and I demand, for
the hundredth time, that you will remove me hence without further
delay.”—“At least, then,” said the Governor, “will you communicate to
Longwood my offers and your refusal?”—“I have no objection to do
that,” I replied. Sir Hudson Lowe then departed, very much
disconcerted, mentioning, as a last inducement, that he could only
send us away on board a transport, that he did not know when the
vessel might sail, and that there was no medical man on board, which
would be a serious inconvenience, considering the state of my son’s
health.

                 OUR REMOVAL FROM BALCOMBE’S COTTAGE TO
                               THE TOWN.

24th.—My son was exceedingly ill during the night, and I was myself
very much indisposed. At daybreak I sent to request the immediate
attendance of Doctors Baxter and O’Meara; and, in the extremity of my
despair, I also wrote to Sir Hudson Lowe, assuring him that it was
impossible we could longer endure the treatment we were now suffering.
I reminded him that, in spite of my son’s dangerous condition, it was
now more than seven days since we had seen a medical attendant; and
that, owing to our inconvenient situation, the Doctors, in spite of
their good intentions, found it impossible to visit us. I therefore
urged the necessity of our quitting the cottage without delay: and I
begged that we might be conveyed to the town, even to the common jail,
if he found it necessary. This letter produced an immediate effect. I
received, on the return of the orderly, a note from the Governor,
stating that I should that day be conveyed to his own residence in the
town. In the evening, an officer came to conduct us thither. How
anxiously did we turn our eyes towards Longwood at the moment of
departure! What were our thoughts and sensations as we proceeded along
the road! What a wound was inflicted on my heart when, for the last
time, I turned to look on Longwood, and saw it gradually disappear
from my sight!

             OUR RESIDENCE AT THE GOVERNOR’S CASTLE.—BETTER
                             TREATMENT, &C.

25th to 28th.—We now found ourselves removed to the Governor’s
residence, which is called the Castle. It is a spacious building and
agreeably situated. Our condition was now changed very much for the
better. We were still guarded by sentinels, it is true; but every
thing was under my orders, and there seemed to be an endeavour to
furnish us profusely with every thing. “Do not spare,” the major-domo
often repeated, “the Honourable East India Company pays for all.” But
these tardy attentions produced little effect upon me. I had but one
object in view, namely, a prompt decision, and that I could not
obtain. The Governor came to me every day, but it was merely to utter
a few complimentary phrases, and not a word of my affairs. However, it
was now indispensable to come to the point. The endless difficulties
that had arisen, and my endeavours to avert them, had kept me in a
continual state of agitation; and vexation of mind was combined with
grief of heart.

I was absolutely in a critical state when I arrived in the town. The
Governor was struck with my extreme debility and the change that had
taken place in my appearance. Apparently with the intention of rousing
me, Sir Hudson Lowe mentioned that the Emperor had expressed a very
great wish to see me before my departure. On hearing this, I was
deeply moved. My son afterwards informed me that the Governor appeared
very much embarrassed by the condition to which he saw me reduced.
However, making an effort to collect my strength, I once more begged
that Sir Hudson Lowe would give orders for my removal as speedily as
possible. He at length determined that my departure should take place
two days afterwards. He informed me that he had procured a ship of
war, which would be more suitable for my conveyance, while at the same
time I should enjoy the advantage of having a medical attendant on
board.

                 THE EMPEROR’S MESSAGE TO ME.—THE GRAND
                          MARSHAL’S FAREWELL.

29th.—Early this morning, an officer came to request that we would
pack up our things to be conveyed on board the ship, as it was
determined that we should depart very shortly. This we looked upon as
the hour of our deliverance. In a few minutes, all that we possessed
was packed up, and we were in perfect readiness. At length the
wished-for moment of departure was at hand. How our feelings vary
according to the circumstances in which we happen to be placed. But a
short time ago I should have considered it the greatest misfortune
that could befal me to be separated from the Emperor, and removed from
St. Helena. But my late resolutions, the manifest wish of Sir Hudson
Lowe, the positive words of the Emperor: “_I request you, and in case
of need, I command you, to quit this island_;” together with other
important observations which fell from him in the course of previous
conversation, and which I cannot hint at here, though they are
entirely foreign to politics; and finally, the chimeras which my own
imagination had conjured up; all now caused me to dread the thought of
being longer detained. The hour of departure had already been
specified; I nevertheless experienced the most cruel suspense, which
the Governor seemed to justify by keeping away nearly the whole of the
day. Impatience and anxiety had thrown me into a fever; when, about
six o’clock in the evening, the Governor, whom I now despaired of
seeing, made his appearance. After a little preamble, in his usual
way, he informed me that he had brought the Grand Marshal to take
leave of me, and he conducted me into the adjoining apartment, where I
had the happiness of embracing that esteemed companion of my exile.
The Emperor had instructed the Grand Marshal to tell me that “he
should see me desert with pleasure, and see me remain with pleasure.”
These were his words. He added, that he knew my heart and my
sentiments; and that he reposed full and entire confidence in me. As
to the chapters of the Campaign of Italy, which I had requested
permission to keep as a dear and precious memento, he granted them
without hesitation, as well as any thing else that might happen to be
in my possession; for he was pleased to say that, while they were in
my hands he should consider them as being still in his own. Sir Hudson
Lowe was with us during this interview, at which his presence was
indispensable. The Grand Marshal commissioned me to make some
purchases of books, and other things, necessary or useful to the
Emperor, and he particularly requested me to send the Moniteur.
Finally, he took leave of me, telling me significantly to act in all
things as I should judge best.

As I expected, the friendship of the Grand Marshal served only to
increase my distress. He expressed his regret for my departure, and
tried to suggest reasons for inducing me to remain. “His absence,”
said he, in a very graceful manner, addressing himself to the
Governor, “will be regretted by us all. It will be a loss to the
Emperor, and it will even be a loss to you, Sir Hudson Lowe. You will
soon be convinced of this.” The Governor replied by an approving bow;
and both endeavoured to prevail on me to change my resolution. I could
easily guess the Governor’s reasons for this; but I could not so well
divine the cause of the Grand Marshal’s entreaties, particularly after
the message which he had just delivered to me from the Emperor.
Besides, he was aware that, in addition to the numerous powerful
motives which urged me to depart, Sir Hudson Lowe, as I believe I have
already mentioned, offered not the least concession on his part. He
insisted on retaining my papers, and required my implicit submission.
By this means, I should, as it were, have legalized all his measures.
By the precedent thus granted I should have authorized him to seize
and imprison any one of us, whenever he might take a fancy to do so. I
could not, without the Emperor’s express command, submit to such
outrages; and, therefore, I firmly resisted them.

            LAST FAREWELL.—SEALING OF MY PAPERS.—DEPARTURE.

30th.—I received an early visit from Admiral Malcolm. He came to
introduce me to Capt. Wright, who was to convey me to the Cape, on
board the Griffin brig. The Admiral recommended me to Capt. Wright as
his friend, and, in a very pleasing manner, assured me that I should
have every reason to be satisfied with the endeavours that would be
made to render things agreeable to me.

I looked forward to the decisive moment with my usual anxiety; for the
Governor betrayed so much eagerness to induce me to remain, that I was
fearful he would finally start some unforeseen obstacle to my
departure.

About eleven o’clock, the Grand Marshal arrived, accompanied by the
Governor and some officers. He renewed his endeavours to prevail on me
to return to Longwood; but without ever expressing the positive desire
of the Emperor. Knowing my sentiments so well as he did, he must have
been aware that a word would have decided me. But this word he did not
pronounce, and he even avoided doing so when I pressed him to it,
always referring to the Emperor’s message, which he had delivered to
me on the preceding day. Thus I had to defend myself against him, from
whom I should have wished to receive support. His expressions of
regard increased my distress, and I was perplexed between the wish of
remaining and the determination of departing. If my heart dictated the
one course, courage demanded the other; and I continued inflexible.

I must not forget to mention that the Grand Marshal, in the course of
conversation, informed me that the Emperor had wished to see me before
my departure. The Governor, however, required that an English officer
should be present during our interview; and the Emperor renounced his
intention, observing that I well knew he would deny himself the
happiness of seeing his own wife and son on such conditions. How was I
gratified by these words!...

I delivered to the Grand Marshal thirteen bills of exchange, on my
banker in London, for the 4000 louis, which I had so frequently
offered to the Emperor, and which the Grand Marshal now informed me he
had consented to accept. This was a real consolation to me.

This business being settled, General Gourgaud, who had accompanied the
Grand Marshal, was also permitted to enter and take leave of me. This
new mark of interest, joined to many others which the General had
shewn me during my imprisonment, failed not to produce an impression
on my heart.

The Grand Marshal and the General remained with me for a considerable
time, and Sir Hudson Lowe had the politeness to say that they might,
if they pleased, stay and breakfast with me. He retired, taking with
him all his people, with the exception of the officer on duty at
Longwood, who had escorted the gentlemen to the castle. This officer
was Captain Poppleton, with whose conduct we had always found reason
to be perfectly satisfied. During our breakfast, over which we sat for
a very long time, we certainly might, in spite of the presence of
Captain Poppleton, have found means to make secret communications with
each other; but we had none to make, and not a syllable of a private
nature passed between us. Had I foreseen this unexpected circumstance,
I might have put into my son’s hands the whole of my correspondence
with Sir Hudson Lowe, and it might, by this means, have been easily
transmitted to Longwood. However, on reflection, I congratulated
myself on not having made any such attempt. I still distrusted Sir
Hudson Lowe, and, from the endeavours he made to prevail on me to
remain, he would certainly have availed himself of such a discovery as
an excuse for changing all the arrangements that had been made, and
issuing fresh orders.

Breakfast being ended, I was the first who had courage to rise and
take farewell. I sent to request that the Governor would come and
execute the final measures. I embraced my friends, and they left me.
General Gourgaud, at parting, several times feelingly alluded to the
little vexations which had occasionally arisen between us. I felt
happy in expressing my conviction that they had been wholly occasioned
by the painful circumstances in which we were placed, and that our
hearts had no share in them. I cherish, with sincere gratitude, the
remembrance of the kind attentions which I received from General
Gourgaud, during the latter period of my residence at St. Helena.[28]

Footnote 28:

  I must here introduce a correction respecting General Gourgaud. It
  was, by mistake, mentioned in the early part of this work that
  General Gourgaud negotiated for permission to proceed to St. Helena.
  He was one of the individuals selected by the Emperor.

Sir Hudson Lowe, on his return, seeing the Grand Marshal and General
Gourgaud going out, said to me significantly, and with an appearance
of embarrassment and vexation, “So you do not intend to return to
Longwood? It may be presumed you have good reasons for refusing to do
so.” A bow was my only reply; and I begged that the Governor would
immediately proceed to seal up the papers, the only thing that now
remained to be done. Some days previously, I had demanded that an
authentic inventory of my papers should be made out: this was done;
and I obtained a copy of it, signed by Sir Hudson Lowe. All that was
now to be done was to affix the seals. The Governor delayed this
formality until the last moment, and he concluded it in a way
perfectly characteristic of his disposition. He told me, in very fair
words, but with an appearance of constraint, that, out of respect for
the Emperor, as well as from personal consideration for me, he would
willingly permit me to affix my seal to the papers, provided I would
consent that he should break it, during my absence, if he thought
necessary. I smiled at this proposal, and declined it; upon which he
walked with hasty strides up and down the room for some time, and
then, as if coming to a sudden determination, he exclaimed, “I will
take the whole upon myself; I will dispense with your seal.” He called
in the Government Secretary, and the seals of the island were affixed
to the papers in my presence. I requested that he would furnish me
with a declaration of his refusal to permit me to seal them with my
arms, or the singular condition he had attached to my doing so. This
was a new subject of hesitation; but the point was at length settled,
by the Governor furnishing me with a declaration, in the following
terms:—

                DECLARATION OF SIR HUDSON LOWE TO COUNT
                             DE LAS CASES.

“In consequence of what was stated in the Governor’s decision relative
to the affair of Count de Las Cases, a great number of the Count’s
papers are now, at the moment of his departure from the island,
detained.

“The Governor, whose special duty it is to suffer no papers whatever
coming from Longwood to leave the island, without being previously
examined, has, however, for private reasons, hitherto abstained from
noticing all that were sent by Count Las Cases. The Governor has
determined that the papers belonging to the Count, which have been
detained (and of which Sir Hudson Lowe knows only the general tenour),
shall be put into two separate packets, and deposited in the treasury
of the island, until orders be received from Government respecting
them.

“Count de Las Cases may affix his seal to each of these packets, with
the understanding that the seal may be broken, either in case it
should be necessary to convey the packets from the island, in
conformity with orders from Government; or in case the interest of the
service should require the packets to be opened.

“Thus, the affixing of this seal is merely a moral guarantee, which
the Governor offers to Count Las Cases for his own satisfaction, to
afford him the assurance of the packets not being opened, except for
one of the urgent reasons above specified.

“If, under these circumstances, Count Las Cases should decline
affixing his seals to the packets, or refuse to accede to the
condition on which the affixing of his seal is permitted, the
Governor, who cannot permit any sealed packet, or any papers whatever,
coming from Longwood, to pass from his hands, without examination,
considers as necessary every precaution calculated to assure his
Government that he has adopted proper measures for the security of the
papers that are detained, until he shall receive orders respecting
them.

“Count Las Cases having refused to affix his seal on the conditions
above mentioned, the papers, divided into two distinct packets, have
been deposited in two boxes, sealed with the seals of the Government
and the Island.

                                        (_Signed_)        “H. LOWE.”

“DEC. 31, 1816.”

All business being now settled between us, Sir Hudson Lowe, by a
characteristic turn of behaviour, which he had oftener than once
exhibited since I had been his prisoner, either from motives of
civility or calculation, immediately wrote for me several letters of
introduction to his private friends at the Cape, who, he assured me,
would prove very agreeable to me. I had not the courage to refuse
these letters, such was the sincerity with which they appeared to be
offered. At length, the long looked-for moment of departure arrived.
The Governor accompanied me to the gate of the castle, and ordered all
his officers to attend me to the place of embarkation; this, he said,
was intended as a mark of respect. I eagerly jumped into the boat
which was in readiness to receive me. I crossed the port, and passed
near a vessel which had just arrived from the Cape, on board of which,
to my surprise, I observed the Pole and the three servants, who had
been sent away from us, several months before, and who were now on
their way to Europe. They saluted me by gestures as I passed, and I
need not say how much I was astonished to see them. One of these
individuals was the bearer of the only document which escaped from the
island, namely, the letter on the subject of the allied Commissioners.
I doubted not but the discovery that had been made with respect to my
servant would furnish the Governor with an excuse for searching those
persons, who were far from suspecting such a thing. Fortunately,
however, no search took place, and the faithful Santini had the merit
of being the first to convey to Europe any authentic account of
Longwood.

At length I got fairly on board the brig; she weighed anchor; and I
thought my last wishes accomplished. But these vain illusions were
destined to be cruelly destroyed; and my ultimate experience of the
hearts of certain men proved that all the hopes I had formed were but
vain chimeras.... How could I so far deceive myself as to rely on the
sensibility of those very men, who, in defiance of all law, had
pronounced the sentence and ordered the execution?—Why did I not stay
to administer domestic consolation, rather than dream of rendering
remote services? I might have continued my daily attentions for some
time longer, and have obtained some additional marks of interest: and
when the fatal moment arrived, I should have had my share in the
general grief. I might have contributed to assuage the anguish of
Napoleon’s last moments; and have helped to close his eyes!... But
no!... Perhaps the effect of the climate operating on my feeble state
of health, would soon have hurried me from this world. I should,
probably, not have lived to witness the sad event.... I should have
been spared the grief that now presses upon my heart.... I should not
have had to struggle with the cruel infirmities brought from my place
of exile. My ashes would there have reposed in peace; and thus to have
closed my life might have been looked upon as an additional favour of
my happy star, or the last blessing of Heaven!

This perhaps ought to be the conclusion of my Journal since I am now
removed from St. Helena, and can no longer record the words of the
Emperor. However, the following pages are so intimately connected with
what concerns Napoleon that I am convinced I need offer no apology for
continuing.

              PASSAGE FROM ST. HELENA TO THE CAPE, A SPACE
                     OF EIGHTEEN DAYS.—DETAILS, &C.

From Tuesday, Dec. 31st, 1816, to Friday, Jan. 17th, 1817.—When
daylight appeared, St. Helena no longer existed for us, except in our
hearts.—We were rapidly sailing away from that dear and accursed spot,
in the midst of the ocean, and at an immense distance from both the
old and the new world. The officers and the crew treated us with the
most marked kindness; their care, their attention, their deference,
the sympathy they expressed were such that, but for the language which
I heard spoken, I might have fancied myself on board a French vessel.
To the shyness and circumspection of St. Helena had succeeded a
complete freedom from restraint. I then learnt how much I was indebted
to Admiral Malcolm. It was he who had obtained for me the favour of a
brig of war, instead of the wretched transport with which I had been
threatened. As soon as he was apprized of Sir Hudson Lowe’s
determination, he hastened to offer him one of his ships, assuring him
that he could spare one, to save me from the inconveniences and the
privations to which I should otherwise be exposed; and, making a
signal, he ordered into the harbour the Griffin, the commander of
which was one of the officers whom he most liked. It has already been
seen that the Admiral brought him with him to see me.

My son devoted part of our passage to copying some papers which we had
purposely torn, and the fragments of which we had distributed in
various places amongst our baggage, or about our persons. Sir Hudson
Lowe had rendered the precaution necessary, by informing me a short
time before that he should again search my papers before my departure,
in order to see what I might have written during my captivity.

The most important of these papers, the document I valued most, was
what I have called a statement of our grievances at Longwood.

Whilst I was in Sir Hudson Lowe’s power, our conversations led me, at
his own request, to make out a hasty statement enumerating our
grievances. My son’s ill health, and the state of my eyes, prevented
us from taking a fair copy of that statement for ourselves. I had
asked the Governor to let me have some person to copy for me, which
request he did not comply with, and I did not think it delicate to
insist; since it was to lay before him a statement, which must be very
unpleasant to him. On the other hand, as I was speaking without the
knowledge of my companions, and yet frequently in their names, it was
of great importance to me that they should be acquainted with what I
said, in order to set me right if I had made any errors.

At the moment of my departure, I told Sir Hudson Lowe that I had
completed the statement, and shewed him the parcel sealed, the
contents of which, I said, I proposed to have copied at the Cape, or
even on board the brig, and to send him two copies, one for himself
and one for Longwood. Sir Hudson appeared to value the offer very
much, but preferring, however, another arrangement, it was agreed that
I should immediately deposit my manuscript in the hands of a third
person, in order that each party might take a copy of it, and that the
original should afterwards be returned to me. I therefore sought some
person whose honourable disposition inspired me with confidence:
General Bingham, the second in command in the Island, was the first
person I thought of. To him I therefore addressed my manuscript, with
the Governor’s consent, and under the express condition that it should
be shewn at the same time to Sir Hudson Lowe and to Count Bertrand,
who was aware of the arrangement.

I heard no more of this statement until six years afterwards, and then
only through the medium of Dr. O’Meara’s work. The gentlemen of the
Emperor’s suite, on their return from St. Helena, informed me that it
had never been communicated to them, and that the Emperor was wholly
ignorant of its contents. It appears that, after my departure, Sir
Hudson Lowe, by the influence of his authority, and contrary to our
express conditions, had taken the manuscript exclusively into his own
possession, and had made it the subject of false interpretations or
wicked inventions.

Mr. O’Meara, in his account of the occurrences at St. Helena, observes
that Sir H. Lowe, availing himself of the information acquired by the
perusal of the manuscript (the grievances), had recourse to an
artifice well worthy of the system which he set on foot. He directed
Mr. O’Meara to inform Napoleon that, during my confinement, I had
confessed that the restrictions imposed on the French at Longwood were
merely matters of form; and that I, as well as the rest of the French,
had endeavoured to poison the mind of our Master, by means of calumny
and falsehood; adding that this fact was unquestionable, since he had
it stated in my own hand-writing. He even pretended to quote a
sentence of this manuscript, which he requested Mr. O’Meara to repeat
to the Emperor, and by which he wished to make it appear that I had
confessed that the French about the person of the Emperor had made him
view every thing through _a blood-stained veil_. On hearing this, the
Emperor observed: _Certainly, wherever one sees an executioner, one
sees blood_. And he added that he was convinced this was an invention
of Sir Hudson Lowe’s, or a misrepresentation of some passage in my
statement. On this occasion, Mr. O’Meara describes the Emperor to have
said, “Las Cases certainly was greatly irritated against him (Sir H.
Lowe), and contributed materially towards forming the impression
existing upon my mind, because Las Cases is a man of feeling, and
extremely sensible to the ill treatment practised towards me and
himself. But I had no occasion for the assistance of Las Cases towards
giving me that opinion, as the treatment I experienced was fully
sufficient in itself to create it.”

He observed that I had constantly spoken to him of the English nation
in terms of enthusiasm and admiration; though I certainly had
expressed myself candidly and energetically respecting the treatment
which the French had experienced at St. Helena, which I considered to
be entirely contrary to the generosity and liberal sentiments of the
English people.

In Mr. O’Meara’s work, entitled _Napoleon in Exile_, I find it
mentioned, under date of Dec. 4, 1816, that Sir Hudson Lowe said, “I
had much altered my opinion concerning him since the intercourse we
had had together;” and he added that the French who were with General
Bonaparte “only wanted to make an instrument of him, to aggrandize
themselves, without caring by what means they effected it,” &c. Sir H.
Lowe wished that Mr. O’Meara should signify this to the Emperor.

Under date of the 12th of Dec., Sir Hudson Lowe is described as having
said that “Count Las Cases had not followed General Bonaparte out of
affection;” and that “General Bonaparte did not know what Las Cases
had written, or the expressions which had dropped from him.”

Again, under date of Jan. 14, 1817, Mr. O’Meara says: “His Excellency
began to inveigh against Count Las Cases, whom he accused of having
been the cause of much mischief between Bonaparte and himself. He said
the Count had asserted in his Journal that Bonaparte had declared he
abhorred the sight of the British uniform, or of a British officer;
that he held both in abomination, and that I had better take an
opportunity to tell him this, and add that I had heard him (the
Governor) say that he did not believe he had ever said so.”

Finally, on another occasion, the Governor charged Mr. O’Meara to
repeat, at Longwood that he had written to the English Ministers
respecting me in such a way as would for ever prevent my return to
France. What he could have written, Heaven knows! However, the result
proved that either the English Ministers were not much influenced by
his benevolent intentions, or that the French Ministers paid little
regard to the representations that were made to them. It will
hereafter be seen that, on my return to Europe, when I was prevented
from residing in England, and it was left at my own option to proceed
either to Calais or Ostend, I made choice of the latter place, for
reasons totally foreign from the alarm which Sir Hudson Lowe pretended
he had created. But, it would appear that he himself doubted the
efficacy of his denunciation, or he had recourse to two-fold
precautions, for he employed all his art and address to procure my
detention as a prisoner at the Cape of Good Hope. I have been informed
that, when speaking to his man of all-work respecting me, he said—“As
for him, he will trouble us no more. We have given him good
recommendations to the Cape: he will _rot_ in a dungeon there.” This
same man, with the gentle smile and honeyed voice which rarely forsook
him, wished, as Mr. O’Meara declares, that Napoleon should be put in
irons if he proved troublesome: and, on another occasion, he is stated
to have said, “That the Allies lost sight of a grand object in not
strangling young Napoleon!”

But to return to my former subject. How was I to reconcile the
Governor’s politeness, his protestations of kindness and good
intention when he was near me, with his false reports, the invented
language which he attributed to me, and the wicked suggestions which
he transmitted to Longwood, when I was no longer there? Let candid and
honest hearts decide this.

                               ----------

The Cape of Good Hope is five hundred leagues from St. Helena; but,
even with the most favourable winds, the passage must be lengthened to
at least seven hundred, by the circuitous course which it is necessary
to take on account of the trade-winds. A vessel, on leaving St.
Helena, first stands well out to the south-west, in order to get as
speedily as possible out of the Zone of the trade winds. As soon as
the variable winds are attained, the ship steers towards the east, but
descending considerably to the south, several degrees of latitude
below the Cape, in order to guard against the south-easterly winds,
which blow with great violence at this season of the year.

We had a very good voyage, and fell in with the winds just as we
wished. Our passage was short and pleasant, though my son and I
occasionally suffered severely from sea-sickness. On the 6th or 7th we
got out of the trade winds, and fell in with the west wind, which
brought us to our place of destination in nine or ten days. It was not
until we were approaching the famous Cape of Storms that we
encountered a violent adverse wind, blowing from the south-east,
accompanied by a very rough sea. But this circumstance was adverse
only with respect to the instructions of our Captain; to me,
personally, it was extremely fortunate. Sir Hudson Lowe had directed
the Captain to land me beyond the Cape, at Simon’s Bay, which is
situated behind it. Probably he supposed that, by not entering the
town, I should attract the less attention, and that the injustice of
my captivity would be the less flagrant. Be this as it may, we were
threatened with a storm, and the Captain took upon himself the
responsibility of sailing for Cape Town, which was nearer at hand. We
arrived off the coast at two in the morning, precisely at the hour
which the Captain had foretold, without sounding or any other
preliminary measure. Captain Wright is an excellent seaman; he
possesses activity, zeal, regularity, and decision; and will, I doubt
not, one day rise to eminence. I have observed that this nautical
precision is now nearly general among the English. I know not what has
been done in our navy, which was so long celebrated for scientific
superiority; but I can affirm, from experience, that the English have
attained great perfection. Their calculations are so correct, and
their nautical instruments so perfect, that it is difficult to
conceive that science is susceptible of further improvement.

We cast anchor at two o’clock in the afternoon on the 17th, after a
passage of eighteen days. The Captain politely apologized for the
necessity of detaining me on board, until he should go and receive the
Governor’s orders: such were his instructions. He returned, informing
me that I could not land until the 19th, as the residence which was
intended for me could not be prepared before that time. This was
rather a disappointment to me; for, after a sea voyage, one is
naturally eager to set foot on land.

Thus I had to remain two days in the harbour of the Cape, which is
extremely beautiful. The weather was delightful; excessively hot, it
is true, but the air was at the same time pure and refreshing.

In my youth, when I first entered the navy, I had frequently heard
officers who had served in India describe all the different points
which were at this moment before my eyes. I felt a pleasure in
reviving these old recollections; and all the places I mentioned were
immediately pointed out to me by the persons on board the ship.

Cape Town is a tolerably extensive place, and is built in a style of
beauty and regularity. It is situated on flat ground, very little
above the level of the sea, and is almost closely surrounded by huge
precipitous mountains. On my left was the Devil’s Mountain; before me
rose the Table Mountain; and on my right were the Sugarloaf, and the
Lion’s Rump, so called from their exact resemblance to the objects
after which they are named. The fortifications in front and on each
side of the town appeared to me to be in a very bad state, and
particularly ill situated, being commanded by several points, and
especially by the Lion’s Rump, which is itself easily accessible. I
was not at all surprised that the garrison should have yielded to
every attack of forces so little superior to its own. The most
effectual plan until this defect be remedied, would be to land at a
distance from the garrison, to the north, on an open part of the
beach, entirely defenceless, and thence to march and attack the town
by land. I recollected having heard it said that the clouds sometimes
suddenly cover the Table and Devil’s Mountain, even when the rest of
the sky appears perfectly serene. I had myself an opportunity of
observing this curious phenomenon, during the short time I remained in
the harbour. On these occasions, the mountains appear to be covered
with snow, of the most dazzling whiteness, and this is vulgarly called
_spreading the table-cloth_, which expression certainly conveys a very
accurate idea of the spectacle presented. In winter, this peculiar
appearance of the clouds is almost always the precursor of a storm.
The harbour is entirely exposed to the north-west winds, which are
frequent and violent in the bad season of the year. The shipping is
then liable to great danger; the only shelter is under Robbin Island,
at some distance from the entrance of the bay.

I mentioned to the persons on board an anecdote which I had often
heard our naval officers relate. Suffren, on returning from the
campaign of India, at the time of the peace, cast anchor at the Cape,
some days before the English squadron, by which he was closely
followed. The latter, on entering the harbour, had to tack, in order
to gain the anchorage. On observing one of the ships as she entered,
the French Admiral, at the very first glance, foretold that she would
infallibly be lost, and he immediately ordered a signal to be given
for all the boats belonging to his squadron to be in readiness to
render assistance. In a few moments, the English ship ran aground;
boats were sent off from all points: but the French had the glory of
being the first to arrive. It was described as being a singular and
affecting spectacle to see the two squadrons, which had lately been so
desperately intent on mutual destruction, now vieing with each other
in the benevolent task of succouring the distressed. The young English
officers, to whom I related this circumstance, informed me that they
had never before heard of it; so true it is that facts, which
powerfully occupy the attention of contemporaries, are lost to the
succeeding generation, when they are not of a nature to acquire
historical importance.




                       -------------------------

                       MY RESIDENCE AT THE CAPE.

                             --------------

               An interval of upwards of Seven Months.

                             --------------

                 MY CONFINEMENT AT THE OLD CASTLE, &C.

From the 19th to the 28th of January.—When the Captain returned from
his visit to the Governor, Lord Charles Somerset, his countenance
sufficiently informed me that he had nothing agreeable to communicate.
He was no longer the same man; his behaviour was cold and embarrassed,
and his reserve was soon imitated by all the other persons on board.
Several naval officers belonging to different ships in the harbour
came to visit their friends on board the Griffin. I could easily
perceive that they felt a certain degree of curiosity to see me,
though they avoided as much as possible entering into conversation
with me. They spoke to each other aside; and, by their looks, seemed
to consider me as an outlaw. From these circumstances, and certain
expressions dropped by the persons about me, I could perceive that, in
spite of the distance, the security of the great captive was the
subject of as much alarm and distrust here as at St. Helena; and I had
every reason to expect that the dark cloud which enveloped Longwood
would be extended over me at the Cape. Accordingly, as soon as I was
put on shore at noon, I was met by the officer appointed to guard me.
Captain Wright, who took me ashore in his boat, for the sake of old
acquaintance, and I hope also from sincere sympathy, declined leaving
me until I should be safely lodged in the abode that was destined for
me. We therefore walked together to what is called the Old Castle or
Fort. After crossing several drawbridges, and passing many sentinels,
we arrived in the inner courtyard or parade, and thence proceeded by
various stair-cases and galleries to the lodging assigned to us. The
doors were locked. It was necessary to search for the keys; and,
meanwhile, we were requested to wait in a room which was occupied by
several officers of the garrison. By chance, an officer of the staff
entered. He seemed to be greatly surprised to find that we were thus
left in free communication with the persons about us; and, assuming a
polite pretence, he conducted us to his own apartment to partake of
some refreshment. After a few hours had elapsed, a messenger was sent
to inform us that our apartments were ready. They consisted of three
rooms, which we were enabled to discover in proportion as the cloud of
dust with which they were filled gradually dispersed; for they had but
that moment been swept. The first room was entirely empty; the middle
one contained a large table, an arm-chair, with broken legs, and four
other wretched chairs; the third contained two bedsteads, two
bolsters, one mattress and three blankets: this was the whole of the
valuable furniture. It was well that we had taken the precaution of
bringing our beds with us from St. Helena. I was at a loss to
comprehend how two days could have been occupied in such preparations.
This circumstance did not afford me a very high notion of the
regularity, precision, or promptitude of the new authority under which
I was now placed.

The officer who had charge of us installed himself in the first room.
A sentinel was immediately stationed on the outside, and I was
informed that I must not communicate with any one. I now found myself
literally a prisoner. I had complained of Balcombe’s Cottage; but here
I was infinitely worse off. This, thought I, is the first effect of
Sir Hudson Lowe’s kind recommendations.

Dinner was served. It was ordered by our officer, and was abundant.
The staff-officer, who had used the precautionary politeness of
conducting us to his apartment in the morning, thinking himself
already on a footing of intimacy, or perhaps, being specially charged
to watch over us, came familiarly to invite me to dinner. He and his
comrade appeared to exert themselves to do the honours of the table in
the most agreeable way. They seemed anxious to shew me every
attention; but I did not feel myself at ease, and, alleging as an
excuse the fatigue I had encountered during the day, I withdrew,
leaving them _tête à tête_ over the bottle; and they sat until late at
night, according to established custom.

On the following day, I received a visit from one of the captains of
our station at St. Helena. Knowing the state of my son’s health, he
brought a medical gentleman along with him. This was a mark of
attention on his part, but the introduction occasioned, for some
moments, a curious misunderstanding. I mistook the Captain’s medical
friend for his son or nephew. The grave Doctor, who was presented to
me, was a boy of eighteen, with the form, the manners, and the voice
of a woman. But Mr. Barry (such was his name) was described to be an
absolute phenomenon. I was informed that he had obtained his diploma
at the age of thirteen, after the most rigid examination; that he had
performed extraordinary cures at the Cape, and had saved the life of
one of the Governor’s daughters, after she had been given up, which
rendered him a sort of favourite in the family. I profited by this
latter circumstance to obtain some information which might serve as a
guide for my conduct with respect to the new Governor, to whom I that
day addressed a letter, explaining my situation, and formally
requesting to be sent to England, and restored to full and complete
liberty. My letter was as follows:—-

“MY LORD,—Having been for several days under your authority, I take
the liberty of addressing myself to your Excellency, in order to
ascertain what are your intentions respecting me. Owing to a
circumstance, of a nature wholly personal to myself, I was removed
from Longwood, at St. Helena, on the 25th of November last, by Sir
Hudson Lowe, the Governor of that island.

“A few days afterwards, in consequence of several conversations with
the Governor, though without his coming to any decision on my case, I
wrote to inform him that, from that moment I should withdraw from my
voluntary subjection to him, and place myself entirely under the
jurisdiction of the laws. I demanded that he would enforce the laws
with respect to me; observing that, if guilty, I ought to be tried,
and if not guilty, I ought to be restored to freedom. I added that the
critical state of my son’s health, and also my own, imperatively
demanded medical remedies of every kind, and I entreated that he would
send us to England. Sir Hudson Lowe then seemed to hesitate. I have
reason to believe that, at first, he entertained some idea of sending
me to Europe. But he next determined to detain me at St. Helena,
separated from Longwood, until the return of answers from England. He
then several times offered to allow me to return to Longwood; and
finally, he sent me to the Cape, under your Excellency’s orders, for
the purpose, as it appears to me, by the literal interpretation of his
instructions, of putting an end to his embarrassments, and perhaps
expecting from another the same results respecting me; but without
himself risking any personal responsibility. Such, my Lord, is the
brief statement of facts which I conceive it necessary to submit to
you, in order that you may form a correct idea of my real situation. I
hope you will consider as perfectly natural, inoffensive and regular,
the request which I have now the honour to address to you, and which
is, that I may be sent to England as speedily as possible, and be
restored to full and complete liberty, as far as my natural rights may
consist with your political duties.

                                    “I have the honour,” &c.

“P. S.—I beg that your Excellency will be pleased to inform me whether
I may be allowed to write to his Royal Highness the Prince Regent and
his Ministers. If that permission be granted, I shall do myself the
honour of addressing to your Excellency two letters, with the request
that you will forward them to England without delay. I shall also be
obliged if you will let me know when there is an opportunity of
communicating with St. Helena, as I have to address some papers to Sir
Hudson Lowe.”

Two days afterwards, I received the Governor’s answer. It was very
brief. Without entering into any particulars, he merely declared that
he considered me as a prisoner _on the report of Sir Hudson Lowe_, and
condemned me to remain at the Cape, until instructions arrived from
England. I could make no resistance; I was compelled to submit. This I
intimated to Lord Charles Somerset, in a second letter, in which I
enclosed two others; the first addressed to Lord Castlereagh,
requesting his Lordship to lay the second before the Prince Regent. My
letter to Lord Charles Somerset was as follows:—

“MY LORD,—I have received the answer which your Excellency addressed
to me, and from which I learn that I am to be detained a prisoner here
until Sir Hudson Lowe shall receive answers from England respecting
me. Doubtless your Excellency has, in your wisdom, accurately weighed
the force of the reasons which induce you to adopt a measure of so
serious a nature, as that of depriving me of my liberty, without any
previous judicial forms, and even without my being made acquainted
with the cause of my detention. All I can do is to submit to
authority, and to rely on those laws which will protect me if I be
entitled to protection.

“I shall not undertake any ulterior argument for my defence, being
persuaded that you, my Lord, in the justice of your heart, when you
determined on adopting so delicate a course, must have attentively
considered the whole of my case. However, I perceive from your answer,
that your decision rests on circumstances stated respecting me by Sir
Hudson Lowe. But have these circumstances been satisfactorily proved
in your Excellency’s eyes? Have you heard both sides of the question;
or do you think yourself screened from all personal responsibility, by
acting on the authority of Sir Hudson Lowe’s instructions, and without
any regard to my remonstrances? How happens it that Sir Hudson Lowe
could not venture, without risk, to detain me at St. Helena, while he
finds it more easy and less inconvenient to do so at the Cape?

“If your Excellency should wish to render yourself acquainted with my
affair, and to ascertain my sentiments, I am ready to submit to your
perusal all my correspondence with the Governor of St. Helena, and to
lay before you my letters to his Royal Highness the Prince Regent and
his Ministers. I make this offer with the wish that it may be
accepted. If to subject myself voluntarily, on my arrival in England,
to any measures, however arbitrary, which might be deemed equivalent
to my political quarantine here, would induce you to alter your
determination, I am ready to accede willingly to that condition: such
is my ardent desire to return to Europe, owing to the state of my
son’s health and my own; and also on account of the melancholy
solitude in which I find myself placed, separated as I am from my
family, which is most dear to me, and from the revered object for
whose sake I made the sad sacrifice of leaving my country.

“Finally, my Lord, if there remain no chance of my liberation, at
least permit my son to depart. Let him not fall a victim to
circumstances to which his age must render him wholly a stranger. I
willingly consent to see him separated from me, in the hope of
securing to him a happier lot than that which seems to be reserved for
me. I will remain here alone, to struggle with my infirmities and
sorrows, to which I shall resign myself with the greater indifference,
when I reflect that my child is released from the sentence of
lingering death which is executing on me, though I have been tried by
no tribunal, and condemned by no judge.

“I have the honour to address to your Excellency a letter to Lord
Castlereagh, enclosing one for his Royal Highness the Prince Regent.
These letters were written before I received the information which you
had the goodness to communicate to me on this subject. I know not to
which of the Ministers I ought to have addressed myself; but I
consider it unnecessary to write the letter over again, as the state
of my eyes renders writing a very painful task, and I find that I have
observed the necessary forms.”

               LETTER TO LORD CASTLEREAGH, INCLOSING THAT
                    ADDRESSED TO THE PRINCE REGENT.

“MY LORD,—As I know not to which of your colleagues I ought to appeal,
I address myself to you, as the person of whom I have acquired the
greatest knowledge through public events. If the details relating to
St. Helena have been communicated to your Lordship, they must,
doubtless, have inspired you with great prejudice against me; and yet,
had they been properly explained, my conduct must have appeared to you
worthy of esteem, and, perhaps, even have excited your interest.

“At Longwood I considered myself within a sacred boundary, of which it
was my duty to defend the approaches. I would willingly have died on
the breach: _I resisted_. But now, when I find myself removed from the
revered circle, and again mingling with the common mass, I assume
another attitude: _I implore_.

“I therefore beg and entreat, my Lord, and I speak in the supposition
that I am addressing the Minister to whom this appeal ought to be
directed, I entreat that you will allow me to proceed to England,
since the alarming state of my son’s health and my own renders skilful
and prompt medical treatment necessary.

“What reason can there be for refusing my request? It cannot be
personal hatred! I am too obscure to attain such an honour. It cannot
be the vague dislike arising from difference of opinion! You are so
much accustomed to difference of this kind in England, and it is
cherished with so little rancour, that it would be ridiculous to
suppose such a circumstance could operate to my prejudice. Can it be
the fear that I should write or speak of the affairs of St. Helena?
But would not your refusal to grant my request, in some measure,
authorize the bitterness which it will be so easy to vent elsewhere?
Besides, if your object were to restrain me from publishing, my
residence in England would surely render this object the more secure
and easy; for there you have not only general laws, but also
particular laws, against such offences. When the individual is near
you, you have, as positive guarantees, his prudence, his judgment,
and, above all, his wish of remaining in the country.

“Thus, my Lord, I see no motive for refusing my request; but I see
many reasons for granting it. You would, by this means, have the
fairest opportunity of arriving at the truth, by procuring
contradictory and opposite statements. In discharging the noble
functions of a juror, can you satisfy your conscience by viewing only
one side of the question? I can shew you the other; and I will do so,
without prejudice or passion. You will find that I am inspired only by
sentiment.

“I must now call your Lordship’s attention to my papers which are
detained at St. Helena. I have several times explained their nature;
but I will once more describe them. They are a collection of
manuscripts, in the form of a Journal, in which, for the space of
eighteen months, I inscribed all that I learned, saw, or heard
respecting him who, in my eyes is, and will ever continue to be, the
greatest of men. This Journal, which was incomplete, incorrect,
unarranged and, from its nature, requiring continual correction, was a
secret, which was revealed only by the circumstances that took place
previously to my departure from St. Helena. Its existence known to
none, except perhaps the august individual who was the object of it;
and even he is, at this moment, ignorant of its contents. It was not
destined to be published during my life; and I took pleasure in
endeavouring to render it a complete and valuable historical monument.
My Lord, I beg that you will order the whole of those papers to be
forwarded to you. This you may do without inconvenience. I solemnly
protest that they contain nothing that can, either directly or
indirectly, be necessary or useful to the local authority of St.
Helena, in furtherance of the great object with which that authority
is intrusted. The inspection of my papers at St. Helena can be
productive of no advantage; but, on the contrary, may occasion serious
inconvenience by aggravating, through the personal allusions contained
in them, the ill-humour and irritation that already prevail in too
great a degree.

“If, on my arrival in England, your Lordship, from your political
situation, should think proper to order the examination of these
papers, which are of so sacred and private a nature, I shall
cheerfully submit to your judgment, because the examination will take
place under my own cognizance, and I shall have the security of those
inviolable and sacred forms, which I am sure your Lordship will direct
to be observed. I trust you will not refuse this second favour, which
I urgently solicit.

“My Lord, I have the honour to forward to you a letter for the Prince
Regent, which I beg you will do me the favour to lay before His Royal
Highness. My profound respect for his august person alone prevents me
from sending it unsealed; and I authorize your Lordship to open it, if
custom admits of your doing so,—I have the honour,” &c.

                LETTER TO THE PRINCE REGENT OF ENGLAND.

“ROYAL HIGHNESS,—The sport of the political tempest, wandering without
a home, an unfortunate foreigner presumes confidently to appeal to
your royal heart.

“Twice in the course of my life, I have had the misfortune to leave my
country; on both occasions contrary to my interests, and with the
intention of fulfilling great and noble duties. During my first exile,
my abode in England assuaged the sorrows of my youth, and I trusted
that England would again afford me an asylum in which I might enjoy a
little tranquillity in my old age. However I have reason to apprehend
that I shall be driven thence. Why should I be visited with this
severity? Can it be on account of the place whence I came, the
attentions which I took pleasure in administering there, and the
tender sentiments which I shall ever entertain towards the individual
from whom I am now separated? But, Prince, at Longwood I was
practising a great and singular virtue; I was supporting, with my
worthy companions, the honour of those who surround the thrones of
monarchs. After the example we have presented, it cannot henceforth be
said that love and fidelity are never shewn to unfortunate sovereigns.

“Should such conduct occasion me to be persecuted and banished from
the asylum I seek? Surely he, who was always great, when he wrote for
me on the rock of adversity, these words so gratifying to my heart:
_Whether you return to France, or go elsewhere, always boast of the
fidelity you have shewn to me_:—surely he, I say, has given me a right
and title to the regard of kings. Prince! I throw myself on your royal
protection.

“During my daily intercourse and conversations with him who once ruled
the world, and filled the universe with his name, I conceived and
executed the intention of writing down daily all that I saw of him,
and all that I heard him say.

“This Journal, which includes an interval of eighteen months, and
which is unique in its kind, but as yet incomplete, incorrect,
undetermined, and unknown to all, even to the august individual to
whom it related,—has been taken from me, and detained at St. Helena.
Prince, I also place it under your royal protection, and I venture to
entreat that you will receive it into your care, for the sake of
justice, truth and history.

“If your Royal Highness should in your goodness deign to afford me
your august protection, I shall hasten to seek, in England, an asylum
where I may tranquilly recollect and deplore.

            “I am, with the most profound respect,

                                                    “COUNT LAS CASES.”

I received in answer, from Lord Charles Somerset, the permission I had
solicited for my son to proceed to Europe by the first opportunity. I
wished my son to avail himself of this permission. I urged and even
commanded him to do so; but he positively refused. On this subject he
wrote a letter to the Governor, which was so gratifying to my
feelings, and reflected so much honour on his own heart, that I cannot
forbear transcribing it. It was as follows:—

“MY LORD,—My father has just communicated to me the permission you
grant me to return to Europe. He has entreated and commanded me to
accept it.

“I cannot, my Lord, avail myself of your indulgence, and I presume to
disobey my father. Bodily afflictions are nothing; the sufferings of
the heart alone are hard to be endured. I have been deprived of my
mother, and I every moment deplore my separation from her; yet I will
never forsake my father in a foreign country, and in a situation so
different from all that he has been accustomed to. My health is an
object of no importance to me. I shall be happy if I can afford any
consolation to my father, and alleviate, by sharing, the miseries
which have long been accumulating upon him.

“I prefer dying by his side to living at a distance from him. I am too
proud of his distinguished virtues, and too eager to imitate his
example, to part from him for a moment. I am ready to die here, since
it must be so: there will be two victims instead of one.

“I thank you, my Lord, with all my heart, for your kind intentions
respecting me. How grateful should I have been, how should I have
blessed you, had you extended them to my father!

                    “I have the honour to be,” &c.

This letter had, doubtless, been read by the family of Lord Charles
Somerset, and produced those favourable sentiments which it was
naturally calculated to inspire. On the following day, when the young
Doctor called to see us, I wished to draw him aside for the purpose of
requesting that he would exert his professional influence over my son
to induce him to depart. But, instead of listening to me, he hastened
to Emanuel’s chamber, and embracing him, expressed his approval of his
conduct, observing that he should not have respected him had he acted
otherwise. Conducting him to the window, he introduced him to two
ladies, whom he had left in their carriage, and mutual salutation
passed between them. These ladies were the two daughters of Lord
Charles Somerset, who had this morning themselves brought the Doctor
as far as the court yard fronting our prison, probably for the purpose
of satisfying the interest and curiosity which my son’s letter had
excited.

Our situation continued to be most deplorable. We were confined in a
sort of dungeon: our windows without curtains, overlooked a court-yard
covered with scorching sand. Though it was now the month of January,
we experienced in this hemisphere the burning heat of summer. We were
almost suffocated.

We were still subject to the same restrictions and the same vexations,
and the same officers presided at breakfast and dinner. This last
circumstance was a particular annoyance to me. I determined to avoid
it, and I therefore kept my bed and had my meals brought to me there:
being determined not to leave my chamber until I should be released
from the torments that surrounded me. I was besides, very unwell from
pains in my stomach; I was occasionally feverish, and in short, my
health was totally deranged. The officer on duty informed me, it is
true, that he had orders to conduct me into the town and even the
environs, whenever I should express a wish to that effect. I thanked
him, and though I could not myself profit by this favour, I accepted
it for my son.

Meanwhile, nobody came near me. Whether it was that the officer,
knowing me to be unwell, thought he was rendering me service, or
whether he was acting in in conformity with orders, I know not: but he
repulsed all who attempted to approach me. This gave rise to a curious
circumstance. Our chamber-door led into a corridor, along which we
were permitted to walk: having one day proceeded to the end of it, I
found, contrary to custom, a little door open, leading to a steep
staircase. Curiosity induced me to ascend, and I found myself on the
platform of the fort, whence I could command a view of Cape Town and
the boundless ocean. Struck with the beauty of the spectacle, I became
so wrapped in the meditations to which it gave rise, that two hours
elapsed ere I thought of returning. By chance I had come out while my
son was taking a walk with our officer. In the interim, the sentinel
had been changed, and when I presented myself at the door leading to
our apartments, the soldier placed his musket across it, and rudely
refused to admit me. The more I insisted on being admitted, the more
angrily he expressed his determination to exclude me. This appeared to
me odd enough, but I thought it still more droll when I found it
necessary to descend the staircase, pass through the court-yards to
the outer guardhouse, and obtain entrance to my prison by main force.
The officer on duty, alarmed at sight of me, ran furiously to the
sentinel who was posted on the outside of our apartments, and a
violent altercation ensued between them. The officer severely
reprimanded the man, and threatened to have him punished. The soldier,
with his eyes starting out of his head, declared that he had
discharged his duty; and I, who remained a tranquil spectator, could
not forbear smiling at this curious dispute, the cause of which no one
could explain but myself. However, peace was soon established at the
expense of the captive. I was again placed under confinement, and
order was restored in the fort.

The only stranger I saw was Doctor Barry, who frequently visited me. I
found his company very agreeable. He constantly recommended me to take
care of my health. He said he could guess the seat of my disorder, and
regretted that it was out of his power to prescribe any remedy for me.
I assured him that the greatest favour he could confer on me would be
to procure a person who could read to me and write from my dictation.
This I had been vainly soliciting since my arrival, for the state of
my eyes precluded all occupation, and my son was strictly enjoined to
abstain from all sedentary employment. I therefore laboured under an
intolerable depression of spirits, in being thus wholly abandoned to
my melancholy thoughts.

The Doctor informed me that the Governor was about to depart, to make
a tour over the colony, and that he would be absent about three
months. This information precluded the hope of any change in my
condition. I determined to make a last attempt, not that I counted on
its success, but only because I wished to leave nothing untried; for
the horrible and truly discourteous way in which I had been treated
astonished me less than it was calculated to do. I was prepared for
it. At St. Helena, we had been repeatedly informed that Lord Charles
Somerset was our personal enemy, and, on my arrival at the Cape, when
I made inquiries respecting his character and the sort of reception I
was likely to experience, I was told that nothing but a dog or a horse
could claim his attention. Subsequently, in the solitude of my prison,
I often thought to myself that, being neither a dog nor a horse, I
might despair of obtaining any notice from the Governor. I shall soon
show how little Lord Charles Somerset deserved these reflections.

Profiting by a passage in his letter, in which he expressed a wish to
render my stay at the Cape as agreeable as possible, I took the
opportunity in my next letter candidly to communicate to him my
thoughts respecting the treatment I experienced. My letter was as
follows:—

“MY LORD,—I learn that your Excellency is on the eve of leaving Cape
Town, and that you will be absent for a considerable time: this
induces me, with extreme repugnance, to enter upon a disagreeable
subject, and to call your Excellency’s attention to a few domestic
details. I think it my duty to do this, for otherwise, should any
public expression of dissatisfaction hereafter escape me, I might
justly incur the reproach of having addressed no complaint to your
Excellency.

“But before I enter on the subject, my Lord, that you may not regard
as ridiculous the facts which I am about to state: and also to afford
you a just idea of the circumstances in which I am placed, of which I
think it very probable your Excellency is ignorant, permit me to
observe, with all the embarrassment of one who is obliged to introduce
himself, that there is no individual here with whom I may not, and
ought not naturally and without reserve to place myself on a level _in
every respect whatever_. Finally, I neither request, nor solicit any
indulgence nor favour relative to my personal wants, wishing in this
respect to depend entirely on my own resources.

“These two points being fixed and determined, I proceed to that
passage in your letter in which you have the goodness to express your
wish of rendering my stay here as agreeable as possible. On this
subject, I must acquaint your Excellency that I am imprisoned in a
kind of dungeon, in which it will be difficult for me much longer to
support existence.

“My son and I, who are both unwell, are, in this extremely hot
weather, lodged in a very small chamber, where we breathe unwholesome
air, and have scarcely room to move, for our beds nearly fill it. The
scorching rays of the sun, darting on a window without curtains,
compel me to pass the day in bed. There is, it is true, another
adjoining apartment of the same kind; but it is a dining room, where
two of your officers do the honours of the table. If I occasionally
enter this room, I count every moment I spend in it. There is a third
room, which is occupied by the officer who is appointed as our guard,
and through which I must pass, however unpleasant to me, on every
indispensable occasion.

“Whatever may be the hardships and miseries of such a situation, I
have been a sailor, I have been a soldier, and what is more, I am a
man, and I can in silence endure this and even more. I speak here,
only in answer to the obliging paragraph in your letter. There is no
fire in our apartments; so that if we should require warm water, on
account of my son’s health or any transient wants, we must either do
without it, or have recourse to the charity of our neighbours. The
Doctor has in vain prescribed the use of the bath for my son; no water
can be obtained for this purpose. If I feel a wish to procure any
little thing at my own expense, I am informed that your Excellency has
ordered every thing to be provided for me; and thus, from motives of
delicacy I repress my wish, and abstain from gratifying it.

“I spare your Excellency a multitude of details, which are equally
beneath your notice and mine. When the hour of dinner arrives, two
officers, who, I feel pleasure in acknowledging, treat me with great
politeness and respect, preside at the table. But it is a singular
fact, though a very certain one, that even their attentions add to my
discomfort, by obliging me to endeavour to return them in a suitable
way, though it would be far more natural and desirable for me to allow
my thoughts to wander far from the spot in which I am now situated.
Besides, our habits and manners are totally different. I find myself
under the necessity of sitting for several hours at table, when I
should not from choice sit for half an hour. All conversation must be
disagreeable to me, unless it be on the subject which now wholly
occupies my thoughts. Your Excellency has too much judgment not to
perceive that the situation in which I am placed is an absolute
torment to me. My melancholy is, doubtless, as irksome to my table
companions as their gaiety is annoying to me. Perfect solitude is
alone agreeable to me; and, therefore, I have completely withdrawn
from the dinner-table, and I take my meals in bed.

“Where is the necessity for an officer being attached to my person? I
presume to ask your Excellency this question, while at the same time I
repeat, with pleasure, that I cannot sufficiently express my
satisfaction with the one whom you have appointed to attend me. Is it
for the purpose of watching me? Surely the sentinel posted at my door
is sufficient for that purpose. Can it be intended as a mark of
respect, for the sake of transmitting any wish that I may express? But
I have no wish. Can it be to give the sanction of authority to any
visits I may receive? I can receive none, except such as are permitted
by authority. Is it for the purposes of accompanying me in my walks? I
will never consent to stir a step, if I must be a trouble to an
officer. I shall not therefore go abroad.

“Since, my Lord, you are determined that I shall remain your prisoner,
what objection can you have to placing me in a house in the town, and
permitting me to engage, at my own expense, any valet, cook, &c. that
may suit me, with the precautions that you may think proper to adopt.
When thus left to myself, your Excellency might provide as you pleased
for my security. You would hear no more of me. If I felt a wish to go
out in a carriage, or otherwise, I could write to the officer: I know
his obliging disposition, and my wish would be granted. I have
mentioned a house in the town, my Lord, because the state of my son’s
health, which requires constant, and often sudden, medical attendance,
renders a residence in the country objectionable.

“Such are the details to which I feel myself compelled to call your
Excellency’s attention. I hope that they may be less disagreeable and
painful to you than they are to me.

                    “I have the honour to be,” &c.

This letter was, from its nature, calculated to lead to a decisive
result. I received an immediate answer. The Adjutant General came to
inform me, in the name of the Governor—1st. That he had given orders
that a separate chamber should be assigned to my son on the following
day;—2d. That the officers should no longer take their meals with
us;—3d. That a more convenient residence was preparing for us; and,
finally, that if I had any other wish to express, endeavours would be
made to comply with it.

Such was the effect of my letter. It was successful beyond my hopes,
and I congratulated myself on having written it, because it afforded
me the opportunity of discovering traits in the character of Lord
Charles Somerset of which I had previously no idea. But this was not
all.—Early on the following morning, the Governor’s first Aide-de-camp
wrote to acquaint me that he had a communication to make to me on the
part of his Excellency, and he wished me to appoint the hour at which
it would be convenient for me to receive him. On the receipt of my
answer he came, and informed me that the Governor had that morning
left town, to make a tour of three months. His Excellency had
expressed himself very sorry to learn that I had been so exceedingly
unwell, and begged that I would do him the justice to believe that he
was entirely ignorant of the fact. The Aide-de-camp was instructed to
tell me that Lord Charles Somerset had nothing more at heart than to
render my abode at the Cape as agreeable as it could be; and he
offered me the use of his country residence, the servants, and every
thing belonging to it. He begged that I would take possession of it,
repeating that, if I had any other wish, I need only name it, and it
would be complied with. I accepted, without hesitation, the offer of
the change of residence, and the Aide-de-camp went to give the
necessary orders for our immediate removal.

I now discovered how greatly the Governor’s character had been
misrepresented to me. I found that Lord Charles Somerset possessed the
grace and courtesy of manners requisite for his high rank. How much
men differ from one another! At St. Helena, such a letter as I had
written would probably have had the effect of doubly rivetting my
chains; but here it procured for me the offer of a palace. The fact is
in itself sufficient to characterize the two authorities with whom I
have had to treat. Lord Charles Somerset was, indeed, far from
meriting the reports I had heard respecting him. Almost every man has
his detractors; and those who have high functions to discharge seldom
escape the tongue of calumny. Lord Charles, as I had subsequently the
opportunity of ascertaining, is a man distinguished for noble and
generous feeling, moral principle, piety, and perfect benevolence.
None of the vexations by which I had been so greatly harassed
proceeded from him, but from subordinate agents, who executed orders
and influenced decisions. For the persons in authority here, who were
the slaves of vulgar national prejudice, hated us as Frenchmen, and
esteemed themselves happy in subjecting us to all the severity which
it was in their power to inflict.

If I had enjoyed the advantage of personal intercourse with the
Governor, in which, I have reason to believe, there would have been no
difficulty, I doubt not that, in pleading my cause with Lord Charles
Somerset, I should have obtained all I demanded, because my demands
were perfectly just; but my situation withheld me from seeking access
to him, and it seemed to be the wish of those about him to prevent him
from coming near me. He several times announced his intention of
seeing me, it is true, but this intention was never fulfilled.

              REMOVAL TO NEWLANDS, THE GOVERNOR’S COUNTRY
                          RESIDENCE.—DETAILS.

From Jan. 29th to April 5th.—Early this morning, precisely at the hour
that had been appointed, the Governor’s Aide-de-camp drove up to the
door of our prison in a carriage and four. We set out; and in less
than three quarters of an hour we reached Newlands, the Governor’s
country house, which might be accounted a pleasant residence even in
Europe. I could easily perceive that several years had elapsed since
the place had first received its name, for it was surrounded by lofty
trees and thick groves: many of the fruit-trees were in full bearing.

One of the Governor’s Aides-de-camp placed us in possession, with all
due form and with the most studied politeness. He conducted me over
the grounds, and pointed out to me every thing worthy of notice,
without mentioning a word about limits or restrictions. He took an
opportunity of adroitly hinting to me that the soldiers whom I saw
posted about were merely the Governor’s ordinary guards, and had
received none but their usual orders. He added that I might consider
myself at home, as every thing would be done under my own direction.
He then took his leave.

When left to ourselves in this delightful place, we felt that we had
been suddenly removed from a prison to a Paradise. The elegantly
furnished apartments, the dovecots in the vicinity of the house, the
birds of every kind that inhabited the grounds, the numerous
flower-beds, groves, and delightful walks, and the silence and
solitude that prevailed—all presented a somewhat magical effect, and
reminded us of Zemire and Azor.

We had the use of the whole house, in which all the furniture remained
just as it had been left by the Governor’s family; not an article
having been removed. My son, on opening a colour-box, found an
unfinished drawing, by one of the daughters of Lord Charles Somerset.
It was a portrait of the revered object whose fate we deplore; for
where is his image not to be found? Beside the drawing lay the copy
from which it had been taken. It was a wretched sketch; a sort of
caricature likeness of the Emperor, which had been made on board the
Northumberland. This thing seemed to haunt us wherever we went, and we
always destroyed it with the ardent zeal of missionaries breaking the
images of false gods. In the impulse of the moment my son made his
poetical _debut_, by writing the following lines beneath Miss
Somerset’s unfinished drawing:—--

           Sous vos doigts élégans tout devrait s’embellir;
             C’est aux belles surtout à peindre le courage:
           Du héros des héros, du Mars de l’avenir,
             Comment avez-vous pu défigurer l’image?

I placed beside the drawing a small medal, which afforded a more
faithful representation of Napoleon. We then shut up the box, pleased
with our trick, and enjoying, in anticipation, Miss Somerset’s
surprise when she should one day read, and we hoped without anger, the
censure which we had presumed to pronounce upon her drawing.

The Governor had carried his attention so far as to send from town a
person to act as Steward at Newlands, to receive from me daily orders
for provisions; and I was given to understand that I might be supplied
profusely with whatever I wished for. But I had adopted Spartan
manners, and I desired to be supplied merely with necessaries. As to
the steward, I changed his occupation, and made him my reader; in
which capacity I found him a most valuable acquisition. By chance this
person proved to be a relative of the only inhabitant of St. Helena
with whom I had formed acquaintance. He was the nephew of the worthy
Amphitryon, our good host of the Briars, for whom I entertain a
sincere regard.

The Aide-de-camp visited us regularly, having received special
instructions to see that we wanted for nothing. I begged that he would
present my thanks and acknowledgments to Lord Charles Somerset, for
the delicate way in which he sought to disguise our captivity. “But it
was all one,” I informed him; “since, in spite of ourselves, we must
deplore our absence from St. Helena and Europe.”

Our departure from prison and removal to Newlands produced quite a
revolution in our condition. We received visits from many individuals,
who expressed themselves anxious to see us. General Hall, who acted as
the Governor’s deputy during his absence, came, accompanied by his
wife, a lady of very pleasing person and manners, and who, moreover,
spoke French exceedingly well. Her husband had been eleven years a
prisoner in France. Mrs. Hall had proceeded thither to join him, in
spite of the severe restrictions which then existed between the two
countries; and, if I recollect rightly, she ventured across the
Channel in an open boat. Both General and Mrs. Hall were intimate with
many of my friends in Paris. General Hall, who is a frank and
honourable man, observed that he should feel happy in repaying me,
without regard to difference of opinion, for all the kind treatment he
had generously experienced in France; and he kept his word.

I was also visited by Colonel Ware, whose wife has a sister married to
one of the members of the present English Ministry. Colonel Ware
resided at a short distance from Newlands, and he came, he said, to
offer me his services as a good neighbour; and, indeed, I found him an
extremely agreeable one, from his kind and unremitting attentions to
me. Finally, a lady, of the highest distinction in every respect, who
at that time accidentally happened to be in the colony, had the
charity several times to visit the captive. This was an unlooked-for
happiness; for the act of kindness thus conferred on me was enhanced
by the charms of agreeable conversation, combined with graceful
manners and the most captivating modesty. She was a lovely European
flower, amidst the heath of the Cape.

We were also visited in our solitude by numerous officers of all
ranks, who expressed sincere sympathy and interest for our
misfortunes. Had their kindness at that time come to the knowledge of
the English Ministry, it might have operated to their prejudice. Even
now, though with a great sacrifice to my feelings, I must refrain from
mentioning their names. But they may be assured that none of their
actions or words were lost upon me; for gratitude is a sentiment
innate in my heart.

Curiosity also had its share in attracting visitors to me. Every
stranger who arrived at the colony, and in particular the numerous
passengers who were proceeding to India, failed not to visit Newlands.
I was a ray flung from Longwood, and all were eager to see one who had
recently been near Napoleon, whom I found to be every where the
universal object of interest, and the constant subject of
conversation.

I had now an opportunity of answering many questions that were
addressed to me respecting the Emperor, the theme on which I always
dwelt most fondly. How many prejudices did I not destroy! How much
astonishment did I not create! It would now be difficult to conceive
how many atrocious and absurd reports respecting the Emperor had
gained credit, owing to the long suspension of intercourse between the
two nations, and their mutual feelings of irritation. Will it be
believed that a military officer of high rank, a man of considerable
intelligence, begged that I would tell him candidly whether Napoleon
was really able to write. He took it for granted that he was a mere
soldier, and nothing else. He seemed indeed, almost to doubt whether
he could read. I laughed, and asked whether he had ever seen his
military proclamations? He replied that he had, but that he supposed
these had been made for him. This officer was much astonished, and
acknowledged that he had nothing further to say on the subject, when I
informed him that, at the age of twenty-seven, Napoleon had been a
Member of the French Institute, undoubtedly the first learned
establishment in Europe.

As soon as we had fixed our residence at Newlands, my first care was
to send to Longwood a few articles of which the Emperor stood in need.
I knew, from experience how many privations he had to endure in that
abode of misery, where it was impossible to procure many things which
long habit had rendered necessary or agreeable. With my heart full of
these recollections, I resolved to transmit to him whatever I could
procure; though I was well aware that the Emperor attached but little
importance to luxuries of any kind. I however ordered some of the best
Constantia and Bordeaux wines, coffee, liqueurs, oil, eau de cologne,
&c. I mentioned that, if they were not of the best quality, I would
decline purchasing them. The Cape is yet but ill supplied with the
luxuries of Europe. Excepting Constantia wine, which is the production
of the place, only small quantities of the articles I had ordered
could be procured. I had taken the precaution to ask General Hall
whether I should be permitted to send the things, and he very politely
replied in the affirmative. With the view of facilitating the
reception of this little package at St. Helena, I had determined not
to have it brought to me at the Cape. I requested the officers of the
Governor’s staff to have the goodness to make the purchases for me,
and only reserved to myself the charge of paying for them. I mentioned
these precautions in a letter to Sir Hudson Lowe, to whom I addressed
the whole. It is stated by Mr. O’Meara that, on the arrival of these
things at St. Helena, Sir Hudson Lowe expressed himself much offended
at what I had done, which, he said, was an insult to the English
Government; and, in answer to me, he afterwards stated that, though I
had acted with much delicacy, yet it was out of his power to permit
the articles to be transmitted to Longwood, because he was charged, in
the name of the English Government, to provide every thing that was
wanting at that establishment.—He forgot that he had often assured us
the sum allowed him was insufficient for the purpose; and that we, on
our part, had frequently complained to him of wanting necessaries.
However, I afterwards understood that the articles had been sent to
Longwood, and I had the inexpressible satisfaction of learning that
the Constantia wine, in particular, had pleased the Emperor. It was
reserved for his own use, and he called it by my name. In his last
moments, when rejecting every thing that was offered, and not knowing
what to have recourse to, he said—“Give me a glass of Las Cases’
wine.” How was I gratified to hear of this!

At the same time, I sent back to Sir Hudson Lowe the note which, at
the sad moment of my departure, had been given to me for the four
thousand louis which I left for the Emperor’s use. It purported that
the sum was to be paid to me at sight. On my hesitating to accept it,
the Governor, Sir Hudson Lowe, ironically said—“Take it, take it. You
will go where the General has funds, and that will enable you to get
payment.” Afterwards, when I came to recollect this circumstance, not
doubting the report that Sir Hudson Lowe would make of it to his
Ministers, I thought it right to send back the note, with the request
that he would transmit to the English Government a correction of the
_erroneous commentaries_, with which I was convinced he had not failed
to accompany his account of the circumstance. “I reserve to myself,”
said I, in my letter to him, “merely the signature, which to me is
more valuable than the sum itself. The note is useless, I added. The
Emperor’s relations would, I am sure, dispute the honour of paying me
back the sum; or, in case of emergency, the first Frenchman I may
happen to meet with will be ready to give me credit for it.”

We had now been two months at Newlands, and, from what I have already
stated, many may be led to believe that we were perfectly happy. But
can there be happiness in a state of captivity, far from one’s native
country? We merely whiled away the hours as agreeably as we could. We
regulated our time, and distributed our occupations. My son pursued
his studies. The piano of the Misses Somerset was one of his favourite
amusements. I read a great deal; for I had books at hand, and my
friends regularly furnished me with the journals and new publications.
In the evenings, my son walked with me in the beautiful groves
surrounding the house; or, as he had bought a horse, he sometimes took
an excursion in the neighbourhood, and then returned to ride backward
and forward in the beautiful alleys of Newlands, where I sat down, and
took pleasure in watching him. I thought I could perceive his health
recruited, and his strength developing itself.

I must confess that, in these delicious summer evenings, the pure sky,
the fresh air, and the beauty of the whole surrounding scene,
occasionally afforded me a few hours’ enjoyment: this was my adieu to
life. The rigidity of feeling occasioned by the treatment we had
experienced at St. Helena, relaxed amidst the charms and perfect
tranquillity of this delightful place, and I was oftener than once
tempted to say, why is not the rest of my family here! Alas! if the
Emperor were but as well situated!... But these moments of oblivion
were brief and of rare occurrence; for, I repeat, there can be no
complete and perfect happiness far from one’s country and the objects
we love. With whatever charms we may be surrounded, we are ever amidst
a desert. This state of feeling, and my impatience to arrive at a
termination of my distress, insensibly affected my health. My constant
sleepless nights afforded no respite to my misery. In vain I devoted
myself to occupation and exercise during the day, and delayed until
late the moment of retiring to rest. No sooner did I lie down than, in
spite of myself, my thoughts instantly turned on the interval that had
gone by. I counted one day less in my exile, and I calculated over and
over again the time that must yet elapse before the order for our
deliverance could arrive from London, the accidents that might retard
it, &c. These thoughts having once taken possession of my mind, I
found it absolutely impossible to close my eyes; and thus I nightly
endured the most cruel torments that can be conceived.

Meanwhile, the period of the Governor’s return was at hand; and I
began to be perplexed at the idea of thus finding myself in the same
house with him; I presumed that it would not be very agreeable to
either party, to have to confound together, under the same roof,
hospitality and seclusion. But my embarrassment was soon at an end.
Whether it was fact or pretence, I know not; but the Colonial
Secretary came to inform me that, in consequence of the expected
arrival of Lord Amherst, who was returning to Europe from his embassy
to China, the Governor found it necessary to assign another residence
to me.

This Colonial Secretary, whom I have not yet mentioned, though he was
the second civil officer in the colony, was a man perfectly eccentric,
both in person and character. He had been several times a Member of
Parliament. He knew every thing, discussed every thing, and usually
confused every thing he meddled with: he was said to be like an
encyclopædia, with the sheets bound up in their wrong places. He first
took it into his head to fix our abode in a residence which he had
built, and which he had persuaded the Government to hire. Fortunately,
he relinquished this design, because various difficulties opposed its
execution. We should, I believe, have been obliged to proceed thither
by sea; and, even had we been safely established in this abode, there
would have been some uncertainty respecting the facility of
communication with us when necessary. At length, it was determined
that we should be lodged with a worthy family who resided about eight
or ten leagues from the Cape, at a place called Tygerberg (Tiger
Hill), which name it received from the Dutch, on account of the
numerous tigers that inhabited the place, at the time when it was
first occupied.

This occupation is not of very remote date; for these lands have not
been exclusively in the possession of the civilized inhabitants until
very recently. Several persons informed me that they had themselves
seen tigers in the beautiful grounds of Newlands. It would appear that
the Dutch, confining themselves to maritime affairs, devoted but
little, or at least tardy, attention to the progress of colonization.
Now, however, the industry and activity of the English are giving a
different turn to affairs. All parts of the Cape, and Cape town in
particular, which the sailors call the _half-way house_ of the two
worlds, will infallibly rise to the highest importance. The soil is
rich and the climate admirable. The productions of the temperate zone
and those of the tropics may be cultivated almost in all parts and at
once. English settlers emigrate to the Cape in great numbers; and the
population is rapidly increasing. Europe invaded Africa by the south,
and the European race will, in course of time, spread over the whole
continent, as it is now spread over America. From Botany Bay,
Europeans will, in course of time, extend to New Holland, and thence
subjugate China. The European race will rule the globe; happy should
it expiate, by the blessings of civilization, the crimes of conquest,
or its impurity of origin!

              RESIDENCE AT TYGERBERG.—THE NAME OF NAPOLEON
               FAMILIAR IN THE DESERT.—MANUSCRIPT OF ST.
                              HELENA, &C.

From April 6th to August 19th.—We left Newlands about the middle of
the day, and at night reached Tygerberg. Our new host was a Mr. Baker,
a native of Coblentz, or its neighbourhood, and we looked upon him as
one of our countrymen, from his origin, his opinions, and the sympathy
he shewed us. The family altogether formed the most agreeable society
imaginable. It would have been impossible for us to have been treated
with greater respect and attention. All our wishes were anticipated
and gratified. We now commenced the third period of our captivity at
the Cape. The first was our insupportable imprisonment in the Castle,
which fortunately lasted only ten days: the second was our abode in
the charming retreat of Newlands: the third was our residence at the
desert of Tygerberg, which was to continue for the space of four
months; and even this might not be the termination of our captivity!

At Tygerberg, we found ourselves situated on the confines of the
wandering hordes. The country, here and there, presented detached
habitations, at considerable distances from each other. These were
occupied by cultivators of various nations, who were clearing the new
grounds, in order to turn them to profitable account; and, with
perseverance, regularity, and a little capital, their efforts will, no
doubt, be successful. Though now removed to the very extremity of the
civilized world, we found ourselves treated with even more than
kindness. We observed that the people here were neither ignorant nor
indifferent with respect to the events of Europe, which, on the
contrary, excited an unusual degree of interest. The majority of the
population was Dutch, and was, therefore, connected with our national
system. Thus, to my surprise, I found the name of Napoleon familiar in
this desert. The most victorious game-cock in the neighbourhood was
called Napoleon! The swiftest race horse was Napoleon! The most
invincible bull in the country was Napoleon! I could not refrain from
laughing at this. But every one has his own way of rendering honour
and respect; and Napoleon was the noblest of all names in the
estimation of the inhabitants of Tygerberg.

Notwithstanding our removal from the town, we still continued to
receive many visits, and it was very gratifying to us to calculate the
degree of interest that was felt for us, by the degree of reserve and
embarrassment that we excited.

The interest we excited was not confined to Frenchmen alone. An
American captain came to me, and offered to rescue me from captivity.
He informed me that he had adopted every precaution, and made every
necessary arrangement; and he observed that all depended on my own
will, since Mr. Baker was not my jailer, but merely my host. Yet what
would have been the use of embracing this proposal? I had but one
point, one object, in view, and that was, to repair to London and
appeal to the English Ministers.

We endeavoured to amuse ourselves with our usual occupations. I had
procured a person to read to me, and I kept him well employed. In
spite of the distance, our friends still continued to supply us with
the journals and new publications. At this time, I read the Letters
written during the last reign of the Emperor by Mr. Hobhouse, who, I
believe, was the first that ventured to speak favourably of Napoleon.
I also procured Warden’s work, which, though containing many errors,
was, I am confident, written with the very best intentions; and
finally, I obtained a sight of the famous Manuscript of St. Helena,
which excited so much interest and curiosity throughout Europe.
Opinion was powerfully divided on the subject of this publication; a
thousand conjectures were afloat respecting its authenticity and real
origin. It would certainly be difficult for me to describe the
astonishment and doubt which it excited in my mind. What were my
feelings and thoughts when I found pages of truth, which seemed to
have escaped from my own secret collection, mingled with whole pages
of error and frivolity! I several times stopped, doubting whether I
was not dreaming. I recognised not only the substance of certain
passages, but even phrases and expressions, in the literal form in
which I had myself transcribed them from the mouth of the narrator.
They were contained in the very papers which Sir Hudson Lowe had
detained at St. Helena. I could positively have affirmed that all the
grand ideas and noble conceptions formed by Napoleon,—all the
political speculations,—and, in short, all the most attractive and
interesting contents of the celebrated Manuscript, were in my Journal
collected from the conversation of Napoleon. If only this portion of
the publication had been read to me, I should not, for a moment, have
doubted that the work had been obtained directly from Longwood. Even
the dates would have warranted this conclusion; for six or seven
months had now elapsed since my expulsion from St. Helena. But whence
had been procured the alloy with which the better portion of the work
was mixed up? This was a riddle which I could not attempt to guess.
Can it be, thought I, that the facts contained in this publication
have been surreptitiously derived from my papers, certain parts of
which may have been selected and put together by strange hands? But,
besides that, I could not bring myself to cherish such a disagreeable
suspicion without better proof. What probability was there that the
hostile authority of St. Helena would favour the publication of that,
which was, upon the whole, favourable to the illustrious victim of the
ostracism of kings?

What was the real sentiment which dictated the Manuscript of St.
Helena? This is, in many instances, very equivocal. By what hands was
it produced? This question gives rise to many contradictory
conjectures. Finally, it may be asked, what was the real object of the
publication? It presents various styles, various sentiments, and bears
evidence of various degrees of information. This publication must have
been the patchwork production of various hands; for how could the
individual, who appears to have been so familiar with the secret
designs of the supposed author and his cabinet, have been ignorant of
his opinion on various public acts, when that opinion was accessible
to every body? as, for example, on the subject of Napoleon’s first
marriage; the situation of the French in Egypt; the trial of the Duke
d’Enghien; &c.

Is it probable that the man, who could have procured by his own means
facts of so confidential a nature, should have been reduced to the
necessity of mixing them up with vulgar errors? And, even supposing
any one to have had sufficient shrewdness to guess these great truths,
would not his judgment have suggested to him the propriety of being
correct with respect to the rest? I shall say nothing of the
far-fetched and singular phraseology which disfigures the work, and
which can only be regarded as a proof of bad taste and an unsuccessful
attempt at imitation. Neither shall I comment on the numerous and
extraordinary anachronisms which this Manuscript contains. These and
other circumstances render the publication totally inexplicable.

Meanwhile, time was running on, and I saw no probable termination of
my exile. The interval necessary for obtaining a return of
communication from England had now expired, and still I heard nothing
of my removal. I was seized with profound melancholy, and almost
reduced to despair. I suffered severely from continual and violent
pains in my stomach. My restlessness at night still continued, my
health daily declined, and disease made rapid inroads on my
constitution. I was at this time attacked with pains in the head which
have never since quitted me.

I have in vain had recourse to the faculty. No remedy has afforded me
any immediate relief, and hitherto I have found that the most
effectual method is to abstain entirely from medicine.

After my return to France I experienced a considerable improvement in
my health. By dint of repose and retirement, I found myself daily
gathering strength. But still, whenever I tried to converse for any
length of time, or to bend my thoughts to any particular subject, I
immediately experienced a recurrence of my disorder.

During the increasing indisposition under which I was labouring at
Tygerberg, I wrote to request that the Governor would permit me to
return to the town, for the sake of obtaining medical aid. But this
request was vain: Lord Charles Somerset now turned a deaf ear to my
representations.

In the impatience and irritation excited by the prolongation of my
captivity, I several times, during my residence at Tygerberg, resumed,
and perhaps in energetic terms, my appeals to the Governor, requesting
that he would permit me to return to Europe. I have reason to believe
that I succeeded in moving him. Whether from feelings of justice on
his part, or from what other cause I know not, but I am sure he was
not without hesitation and anxiety respecting me. He probably asked
himself whether it was proper in him to become a jailor after the
manner of Sir Hudson Lowe? And whether he had a right, after all, to
deprive me of my liberty? But whenever he thus wavered, his
ill-natured advisers were at hand to confirm him in his resolution of
detaining me. “Is he not well lodged and well fed?” said they. “What
then has he to complain of? and how has he acknowledged the good
treatment he has experienced? By confining himself and refusing to go
abroad, in order to give a greater colouring of probability to what he
is pleased to call his tyrannical imprisonment.—What have been the
expressions of his letters, always so misplaced and so violent?” Every
thing was turned to my prejudice, and one circumstance, in particular,
was taken advantage of for this purpose. On the arrival of Lord
Amherst and Admiral Plampin, Lord Charles Somerset, with the intention
probably of affording the strangers an opportunity of seeing and
questioning me, sent me, in the midst of my desert at Tygerberg, a
formal invitation to a ball, which, as well as I can recollect, was
given in honour of the Prince Regent’s birth-day. The messenger was
directed to wait for my answer. I wrote it on the card of invitation,
and in very decided terms. I was vexed that Lord Charles Somerset
seemed to have so little idea of the melancholy situation in which I
was placed as to imagine me capable of going to a ball. The persons
about the Governor probably insinuated that, if his Excellency had
committed a fault in detaining me, it was now too late to remedy it;
that the thing was done, and his Lordship would be held responsible
for it; that to alter his determination would be an acknowledgment
that he did not know how to act; would be condemning himself, &c. I
presume, therefore, that it was resolved to run the risk of letting
the affair come to a close any way it would.[29]

Footnote 29:

  Chance has thrown in my way a document, which affords a decided
  proof of the manner in which Lord Charles Somerset acted. I have now
  in my possession a duplicate of a letter from Mr. Goulburn, the
  Under Secretary of State, addressed to Madame Las Cases, at Paris,
  and dated February 21st, 1817. The letter states that Mr. Goulburn
  is commissioned, by Lord Bathurst, to inform Madame Las Cases of the
  departure of her husband from St. Helena for the Cape; and that, in
  case he should determine on returning to Europe, he might be
  expected about the month of May. Yet I did not leave the Cape until
  three months later, namely, about the end of August! Thus it would
  appear that Lord Bathurst had no intention of detaining me there;
  and that Lord Charles Somerset, instead of executing the orders of
  the English Minister, merely obeyed the suggestions of Sir Hudson
  Lowe. I certainly have no reason to suppose that Lord Bathurst
  would, in the slightest degree, regret this irregularity, however
  fatal it might be to me. But, if I know any thing of the character
  of Lord Charles, I am sure he must have been sorry for it. Being
  fully persuaded of this, I sincerely forgive him for the treatment I
  experienced.

All these adverse circumstances combined to estrange Lord Charles
Somerset entirely from me, and so far offended him that, in spite of
his natural disposition, he treated me with a degree of inhumanity. I
addressed a letter to him, describing the state of my health, and
urging the indispensable necessity of my removal to the town. But to
this he coolly replied, in a note sent by his Aide-de-camp, that,
though he could not alter his arrangements, he had given orders for my
obtaining medical attendance. But I was situated at a distance of
eight or ten leagues from Cape Town; the Doctor could only visit me
once a week; and as he prescribed remedies which could only be
procured in the town, their application was impracticable. I lost all
patience on reading this answer, which seemed to be an act of cruel
irony rather than a measure of relief; and I indignantly addressed a
letter directly to the Colonial Secretary. I stated that, “as it was
by his direction I had been removed to Mr. Baker’s, I took the liberty
of informing him that, as it was absolutely necessary I should be near
my medical attendant, I presumed he could have no objection to my
removal to the town, to the house of Dr. Leisching, Mr. Baker’s
father-in-law.” He replied that he had consulted with the Governor,
and that his Excellency had declared that his instructions did not
admit of my coming back to Cape Town.

But I determined not to be satisfied with this, and I again wrote to
the Colonial Secretary. I informed him that, “in spite of his letter,
nothing but absolute force should prevent me from quitting Tygerberg.
I was determined to repair to the town, and that the Governor might,
if he pleased, confine me there, and even keep me a closer prisoner
than I was at Tygerberg, as, at least, I should enjoy the advantage of
being within reach of medical advice and remedies; that though perhaps
I had no reason to attach great value to existence, yet I felt it to
be a kind of duty to defend my life.” Fortunately, the permission for
my departure at length arrived from England, just at the very moment
when I was about to execute my determination; otherwise I know not how
the matter would have ended. The Governor communicated this welcome
intelligence to me, accompanied by the offer of a lodging prepared for
me in the town. But I declined accepting it, and proceeded, as I had
originally intended, to the house of Dr. Leisching, where I
experienced all the attention and hospitality of Tygerberg, in a truly
patriarchal family, whose society produced a beneficial effect on my
health and spirits.

Now commenced a new series of vexations. I was doomed to drain the cup
of disappointment to the very dregs. The Governor, when he informed me
of my release, mentioned that two opportunities presented themselves
for my departure, and he wished me to make choice of one. I
immediately replied that the speediest would be the most desirable. I
now confidently expected the receipt of my passports, and the final
commands of the Governor. I was confined to my bed. Two days elapsed;
and in the mean time one of the ships sailed. What was my vexation and
disappointment, particularly when I was afterwards informed that the
Governor had nothing more to communicate to me; and that I was at
liberty to make whatever arrangements I pleased respecting my
departure. I vehemently complained that the first opportunity should
have been allowed to escape; but for this there was no remedy. A large
transport was lying in the harbour, which was destined to convey a
regiment of artillery to England. I begged the Governor would permit
me to take my passage in this vessel, as there were medical officers
on board. His answer was that there was no accommodation for me. In
vain I represented that if there had been two additional
artillery-officers, they would certainly not have been left behind;
that if there were two more sailors to be embarked, they would surely
find room for them; and we wanted no better accommodation. All these
arguments were unavailing. I was informed that the ship was to touch
at St. Helena, and that this circumstance, in itself, would preclude
the possibility of my taking my passage on board her. I was compelled
to yield, and to confine myself to the choice which the Governor had
so generously left me, which was to proceed to Europe by the only ship
that was then in the harbour. This was an extremely small brig, an
absolute cock-boat, destined to perform a voyage of three thousand
leagues. However, I felt no hesitation. I would have leaped into the
sea rather than have delayed another moment. The bargain was soon
struck, and I was now all impatience for the moment of departure.

The Captain of the brig informed me that he had received orders from
the Governor to prohibit me from having any communication on shore, if
he should be obliged to touch at any place in the course of the voyage
and on reaching England, he was not to suffer me to land until he
should previously receive orders from Government. Thus I was
absolutely a prisoner in the hands of this man, though I was bound to
pay him the sum which he had been pleased to demand for my passage.
This circumstance appeared to me so extraordinary that I wished to
obtain a confirmation of it, lest it might be the subject of doubt
when I should have to relate it. Therefore, when, for the last time, I
applied to the Governor for my passports, I called his attention to
this extraordinary fact. I begged that he would certify, in his answer
to me, that I had myself agreed to pay for my passage on board the
brig, which, by his instructions, was now converted into my prison.
But, as it may be supposed, I received my passports and nothing more.




                       -------------------------

                           PASSAGE TO EUROPE.

                                -------

                   A space of about a Hundred Days.

                                -------

         _From Wednesday, August 20, to Friday, November 15._

                 WE SAIL FROM THE CAPE.—OUR PASSAGE.—WE
                          ANCHOR IN THE DOWNS.

Towards evening we proceeded to the beach, accompanied by our two
excellent hosts of Tygerberg and the Cape, whose hospitable cares,
extreme attention, and all the proofs of true affection which they
gave us, have inspired us with deep feelings of gratitude. The weather
was calm, but as we entered the boat, a favourable breeze sprung up,
as by enchantment. We all exclaimed that this was an auspicious omen;
but it was far from proving so: for it will be seen that our passage
turned out to be one of the longest, and, towards the end, most
frightful and terrible. We got on board, the anchor was weighed, and
we at last set sail for that Europe we had so long wished for.

From the moment we got under weigh, I and my son were separated from
Cape Town and the coast of Africa for ever. Not that they were out of
sight even on the next day; but, because we both remained shut up
below, suffering most terribly from sea-sickness, the effects of which
lasted a considerable time, and of which we thought we should die. Our
berth was small, dirty, and inconvenient; our brig was of about two
hundred tons’ at most; and the crew consisted of twelve hands, two of
whom were boys; and indeed, with the exception of the Captain and the
Mate, the only two who could be reckoned able sea-men, and of the
Cook, an infirm old man, all the rest were mere lads. This want of
hands was the more striking to me, and tended the more to increase my
natural disposition to sea-sickness; as, with the exception of the
Griffin, I had never been on board any but seventy-four gun ships,
manned by seven or eight hundred men.

After thirteen days’ sailing, we reached the tropic of Capricorn, and
fell in with the trade-winds. On the Sunday following, the 7th of
September, we passed in sight of St. Helena, but at a distance of
upwards of fifteen leagues; it was hardly possible to perceive it. It
would be necessary to have been on that Island, situated as I had
been, led thither by similar motives, and to have felt the same
affections, and all the other sentiments which my residence there had
inspired me with, in order to conceive all the sensations which I
experienced on finding myself near that spot,—all the thoughts which
occurred to my mind,—the feelings of regret which assailed me. I had
had it in my power to remain there; and I had wilfully chosen to
banish myself from it!... Indeed, the experience I had had of the Cape
began to make me fear that I had founded my determination on chimeras.

We were now sailing smoothly towards the equator, on this tropical
sea, on which we had to go upwards of three thousand leagues. Our
little vessel composed our universe. What a vast field of meditation!
to find one’s self alone, for about a hundred days, on the vast ocean
without any other shelter than the immense expanse of the heavens, on
a floating atom, and separated only by a frail plank from the voracity
of sea monsters, and an unfathomable abyss!

At the expiration of a month, 20th September, we at last got into our
northern hemisphere again, by crossing the Line almost at the same
time as the sun, which was going down towards the south, on our
larboard tack. We were very fortunate in our navigation in the
immediate vicinity north of the equator, where calms or storms are
invariably met with. In those regions, the excessive heat of the
equator, and that produced by the sands of Africa, combine to torment
and harass nature, who expresses her lassitude by continued calms, or
is roused by torrents of rain and terrible thunder-storms.

Twenty-five days afterwards, we passed the second tropic, and reached
the boundaries of the variable winds of our regions.

We had left the Cape in winter, and after having crossed the torrid
zone, we again found winter at the gates of Europe: thus tempests were
stationed at the two extremities of our navigation. We had fortunately
escaped the tempests of departure; but we had still to expect those of
arrival: these we found at their post, and furious they turned out to
be.

At the end of about twenty days of light and variable winds, we
arrived off the Azores. Our voyage had been already extremely long.
There have been instances of the passage from the Cape to England
having been performed in thirty days;—the average perhaps is fifty
days. We had now been eighty days at sea, and our troubles were only
about to begin. When in sight of the Azores, our tribulation, and what
we called our _Passion week_, commenced.

On the 1st of November we experienced our first gale; a moderate one,
it is true, to begin with, as it were, and set us agoing.

On the 2nd November, we had a calm to give us breath. On the 3rd, came
a second gale, still tolerable; but, during the night, which was one
of the darkest imaginable, a third gale sprang up, and this time, it
amounted to an absolute hurricane. The wind suddenly chopped round,
from aft to fore, with a dreadful noise; and blowing furiously, it
took, sideways, the few sails we had set, and in one instant, with the
rapidity of thought, one side of the ship was in the water, and the
sea reached nearly to the foot of the masts. A great number of the
casks belonging to the cargo were upset, and by their weight increased
the heeling of the ship, already so dangerous. Fortunately, the wind
carried away the sails, which were abandoned to it, or we should have
capsized. We all thought ourselves lost, and we must have been
drowned, had not fate ordered it otherwise.

Such a state of things lasted the whole of Friday, the 7th. Suffering
from sea sickness, I had not stirred from my hammock for a long while;
but at about four o’clock, I took advantage of a more calm moment, to
crawl to the outlet of our wretched cabin, to examine the state of our
situation. The spectacle was truly grand, sublime, awful, terrible.
The vast ocean, surmounted by a sky red with fury, covered with
innumerable roaring mountains, and furrowed with deep valleys and
fathomless abysses, formed a sight which filled me with an awful
feeling of terror. Our little boat glided with admirable rapidity
between two moving mountains, the extremities of which often met on
our deck, threatening every moment to unite there together for our
final destruction, whilst behind us huge rolling billows, similar to
the fantastic monsters of fabulous history, pursued us with
unrelenting ardour, raising their hideous heads above our stern, as if
to contemplate and rush upon their prey, which continually escaped
from them, not, however, without their carrying away, here and there,
some pieces of timber from our upper works. This situation was one of
imminent danger: few words were exchanged between us; we looked at
each other in silence; and suffered things to take their course. It is
certain that a false movement at the helm, or the slightest act of
inattention or neglect, would have been sufficient to cause us to be
instantly swallowed up. Had we been caught by one of these terrible
waves astern of us, its weight would have borne down every thing
before it, and that indeed was our greatest peril. We were more than
once threatened with seeing our cabin stove in; the waves dashed over
our heads, with a noise like the report of a cannon. We observed them,
with terror, gaining ground upon us; and we spent a great part of the
dreadful night that followed in securing and fortifying ourselves
against them.

My son, who could neither go to bed nor sleep, frequently went upon
deck to see how things were going on, and then came back to me, as I
lay in my hammock. Not knowing what to do during that long and cruel
night, to divert our minds from the contemplation of our situation,
and beguile time, if possible, I endeavoured for a moment to dictate
something to my son; it was a passage of ancient history. But,
presently, a wave, having stove in some part of the works above, came
and inundated my hammock, and the paper on which my son was writing.
We thought ourselves at our last moment.

However, all that has been read was not destined to form the
complement of our danger, or the extent of our fears. The tempest
still lasted, and seemed even to increase; at last, on Saturday the
8th, towards morning, the man who was at the helm, as being the most
dexterous and the most intrepid of the crew, declared that he would no
longer take charge of it; he began to feel giddy, he said, and he
feared lest some error on his part should prove fatal to all. We were
then obliged to have recourse to our last resource, _mettre à la
cape_, that of letting the ship drive before the wind; a most ticklish
manœuvre in the desperate situation in which we were placed,
because we ran the risk of going down in the attempt to execute it.
But Providence still favoured us; by the greatest good fortune
possible, we succeeded, and a shout of joy and gratitude from the
whole of the crew above, imparted to us below the welcome news. We
considered ourselves most fortunate, although the difference between
the two situations was chiefly this, that whereas before we ran the
risk of foundering, by being taken by the sea aft, we now had the
chance of foundering, by the sea taking us on the beam.

This violent gale had now lasted three days, and our week was going on
towards its completion. I placed great reliance upon the Sunday, which
was about to begin, not only on account of the moon, but also because
Sunday had happened to be peculiarly marked by something favourable to
us ever since our departure. Nor were our hopes disappointed, for, in
the course of the night between Saturday to Sunday, the weather became
tolerably moderate, and, when daylight appeared, we were enabled once
more to pursue our course. It is certain that, from a strange
combination of circumstances, the Sundays had always been marked by
some fortunate events, since our departure from the Cape. It was on a
Sunday that we had passed the southern tropic, and fallen in with the
trade-winds; on a Sunday we had seen St. Helena; on a Sunday we had
passed the Island of Ascension; on a Sunday we had crossed the Line;
on a Sunday we had passed the second tropic; on a Sunday we had
arrived in the latitude off Gibraltar, the first point of Europe;
lastly, it was on a Sunday that we had arrived in the latitude of
Bayonne and Bordeaux, the beginning of our dear France; and it was on
a Sunday again that we were at this moment ending that terrible week
off Brest. We might fairly reckon henceforward, we said, upon some
fine weather; we thought that we had sufficiently paid our tribute; we
hoped that we had exhausted the fury of the wind: the lead brought up
European clay; and we only thought of an agreeable termination to our
voyage. But, vain calculation! our lucky Sunday being over, we had to
encounter a fifth gale.

We were now beginning to enter the Channel without, however, having
yet seen land, by which means our true position was unknown to us.
Prudence required us to stand out to sea, but fortunately it was not
for a long time; and, having resumed our course, we at last came
within sight of the Lizard Point; but we seemed doomed not to have
twenty-four hours of comfort. A thick fog almost immediately came on,
and a sixth gale sprung up under the most inauspicious appearances. It
blew from the south, and therefore threatened to drive us ashore; we
were now in the Channel and without shelter: on one side we had the
Lizard, and on the other the Scilly isles, which are extremely
dangerous; there was a very heavy sea: we did not know precisely where
we were; night was coming on, and a night of fourteen hours! How many
causes of uneasiness! What a state of perplexity both for the mind and
for a calculation of the chances! We were all completely downcast and
disheartened; when a shower of rain, accompanied by thunder, although
it was then in the middle of November and the weather very cold, broke
the spell. The wind suddenly veered to the proper quarter, and this
time it put an end to all our difficulties by bringing us into the
Downs, where we anchored. Happy, and ten times happy, to have escaped
dangers so formidable and so numerous!




                       -------------------------

                       VOYAGE FROM THE THAMES TO
                               FRANKFORT.

                               ----------

                     An Interval of Twenty Days.

                               ----------

                  _From November 16 to December 11._

I AM NOT ALLOWED TO REMAIN IN ENGLAND.—REMOVAL TO OSTEND.—PERSECUTIONS
  IN BELGIUM, PRUSSIA, &C.—AGREEABLE COMPENSATIONS.—ARRIVAL AT
  FRANKFORT.

On the preceding evening we had anchored in the Downs, merely for that
night; the next morning, at day-break, we set sail for the Thames,
London being our place of destination. It now appeared as if no
occurrence could henceforth keep me from that city, and I was already
calculating the hour of arrival. All my hopes might at last be
realized; my confidence was returning; but how greatly was I mistaken!

Arrived at Gravesend, where a vessel is stationed for the special
purpose of superintendence over foreigners, I no sooner gave my name
than an agent of government informed me that I could not proceed any
further, and that I must follow him immediately, with my luggage, on
board of the _Alien Ship_. In vain I remonstrated, and represented to
him that, with my passport, I was in strict conformity with the
regulations: that very document it was which condemned me. I have been
since informed that this measure had been ordered against me in every
port of England, long before my arrival.

I was no sooner on board the Alien Ship, than seals were placed upon
my papers, and I was apprized that I must wait for final orders from
Government. I had written to Lord Bathurst the very instant of our
anchoring in the Downs; I now wrote to him again. I was ignorant of
his intentions towards me; but it seemed to me impossible that he
should not eagerly summon me before him; and, above all things, it
could not enter into my mind that he would neglect to avail himself of
so favourable an opportunity for hearing a counter-statement of all
that had taken place at St. Helena. It will be seen, however, that I
was mistaken in my suppositions.

With the exception of being kept in confinement, every mark of
attention was shewn to me on board the Alien Ship. The Captain, who
had had very little to do since the peace, and who never made his
appearance but in the day time, gave me his own bed to sleep in.

Harassed by these fresh vexations, suffering from my habitual
complaints, and wearied of my new prison, I had gone to bed at an
early hour, when I was awaked on a sudden, in the silence of night, by
a shrill voice. “Count, Count,” cried some one who was seeking for me
in every corner, and who in his hurry had not even waited to procure a
light, “_It is the Prince Regent’s pleasure_ that you instantly quit
Great Britain.” In the confusion of my broken sleep I chanced to
reply, “Assuredly this is a very sorry and silly pleasure for his
Royal Highness; but you, Sir, who are you?” He then told me that he
was a government messenger. I requested that he would wait until I
should be ready, and I tried in vain to complete my night’s rest. At
daybreak my son and I were desired to step into a boat, landed with
mystery, thrust into a post-chaise, and conducted by the shortest road
to Dover, where my guide informed me that he had orders to see me on
board of the packet for Calais or Ostend, whichever I preferred, as I
was not allowed to fix my choice upon any other port.

It happened, from some cause or other, that we could not sail
immediately from Dover, and I was told that there might be a delay of
two or three days. We were shut up in an inn, where my keeper, under
the specious pretence of consulting my convenience, practised upon me
the meanest of all contrivances. If complaints are made on the
Continent of disgraceful proceedings on the part of police agents, it
must be admitted that the man we had now to deal with might well rival
those of any other country.

Having happened to say that it was a pity my papers had been sealed
up, as otherwise I might have taken advantage of my stay, in order to
write a few letters, he immediately protested against the hardship of
my being deprived of what he called a most innocent and a most natural
satisfaction; and directly went himself to break the seals, and gave
me up all my papers, recommending me to do all in my power to
alleviate the unpleasantness of my present situation, of which he was
the unwilling instrument. Will it be believed that this was nothing
more than a snare laid for me, in order that he might afterwards have
the pleasure of seizing whatever I might have written, under the
delusion of a feeling of confidence which he thus excited! During the
time we were together, this man had been remarkable for his
officiousness towards us, coupled, it is true, with a thousand
impertinent expressions, which sufficiently evinced all his baseness.
He told me, for instance, that he and his colleagues considered it
their duty to know no other law than the _pleasure_ of the Prince: he
spoke of _his master_, Lord Sidmouth, the Secretary for the Home
Department; of _his master_ who had preceded Lord Sidmouth, and so on;
and as I observed, in joke, that I had thought that he belonged to the
Administration, and not to the Minister, he replied, with the utmost
candour, that I was mistaken; that he belonged to the Minister, as it
was the Minister who paid him his salary, and who might take it away
at his pleasure. He added much other nonsense of the same kind, which
savoured more of the negro slave of Jamaica than of a white of Europe,
and of a citizen of Great Britain; this, however, would have been a
matter of perfect indifference to me, had not his base principles been
put in practice upon me, as the sequel will shew.

At the very moment of our departure, and, when I was on the point of
starting, this man, until then so complaisant and so officious, told
me, in rather an insolent manner, that he had a trifling formality to
fulfil towards me; and, seizing upon all my luggage, he searched most
minutely amongst my linen and clothes, took possession of all my
papers, without the least ceremony, and even refused to give me any
kind of inventory of them. I complained aloud; I called for the
protection of the Magistrates; I demanded that my protest, at least,
should be received; I was answered that, in the situation in which I
was placed, and being a foreigner, the benefit of the laws which I
invoked could not be extended to me; and in this manner I was obliged
to quit England, leaving, however, behind me, the following letter for
Lord Sidmouth:—

“MY LORD,—It is with feelings of the deepest regret that I do myself
the honour of addressing your Lordship, aware that your reply, which
might perhaps gratify the object of my wishes, will reach me too late.

“For the last four days I have been in the power of your messenger:
who, upon his arrival, removed the seals which had been put upon my
papers, saying that he again placed them at my disposal. He has since
seen me write, has even encouraged me to do so, and has waited for the
moment of my departure, to take possession, in your name, of every one
of my papers. This is a snare, my Lord, which my heart forbids me to
attribute to a higher quarter than the individual who has practised
it. That messenger understood no language but English; he called
another person to his aid, who pretended to understand a little
French, and who has thought proper to peruse my papers, one after
another, and even to detain them all. There was enough for a whole
week’s reading, and I did not imagine that any private individual
could have such a right over me.

“Every thing has been taken from me, letters, notes, my son’s
exercises, title-deeds, family secrets, official documents from Sir
Hudson Lowe and Lord Charles Somerset, my daily memoranda, even a
letter to the French Minister of Police, and another to my wife, which
I had prepared during my leisure moments here, in order that I might
forward them on my landing at Ostend. They have been taken without
allowing an inventory or register to be made of them. Such, they said,
was your Lordship’s order. In the first burst of indignation, I have
protested against this violence, and demanded that a Magistrate might
receive my complaint. I shall not record here the reply that has been
given to me. Recovered from the first moment of surprise, and dreading
nothing so much as to see my name mentioned in public discussions;
considering also how impossible it was that your Lordship should have
ordered so great a deviation from the rules of every acknowledged
system of jurisprudence, according to which governments are required,
in cases like the present, to take such measures as will enable them
to guard against the possibility of being accused of having withdrawn
or superadded any document; I contented myself with urging and most
earnestly entreating the messenger, who had my fate in his hands, to
allow of my departure being retarded until I had been able to write to
your Lordship, and until he had himself received a confirmation of his
rigorous orders. But this man, who had already caused a delay of three
days upon slight pretexts, proved quite inflexible on the present
important occasion. In vain I represented to him that I had no
objection to shew all my papers to the confidential persons whom your
Lordship might have appointed to see them; that it was even for your
Lordship’s interest that certain formalities should be observed
towards me; that, in the examination of my papers, my presence would
be useful, if not absolutely necessary, in order to explain many
things that could not be understood without me; whereas, he was
sending me to the Continent, and forwarding my papers to London; that
no doubt there was some mistake, which twenty-four hours’ time would
clear up. I was coolly told, in reply, that I need not be uneasy about
returning from the Continent, if that was thought necessary, as your
Lordship would defray all the expense of the voyage. My Lord, in what
hands have you placed me? On another occasion, in which this man could
surely not have consulted your wishes, I found myself compelled to
silence my guard, in consequence of the gross and injurious
expressions which he used concerning the illustrious personage whom I
respect above all others in this world.

“In short, my Lord, since I have reached your shores, I have been
treated as a malefactor; and yet, where is my crime? A difference of
political opinion, perhaps, and a voluntary imprisonment at Longwood!
But is not the latter act one of the most noble and most generous; one
so highly honourable that the man does not exist who, at the bottom of
his heart, would not be proud of having set the example of it? My
Lord, the mildness of disposition and love of justice, which are said
to distinguish your Lordship, cannot, I am confident of it, have
authorized all that has been done to me. Having been allowed to affix
my seal to the papers that have been taken from me, I have hastened to
do so, not as a precaution against your Lordship, but on the contrary,
to remedy, in your behalf, the want of formality of which your agents
may have been guilty.

“I entreat your Lordship to reconsider my case, and not to form an
opinion upon my papers, without having first received from me the
explanations you may require; and which I shall ever be most ready to
afford. I affirm beforehand that, whatever difference of opinion and
feeling may be found in them, there is not one that will not bear the
test of a judicial investigation or of a friendly discussion. They
contain nothing possessing any degree of interest in state matters,
and no political secrets. I never possessed any documents of that
kind, and if I had, opportunities would not have been wanting to have
put them out of the way long before this.

“It would perhaps be the moment to speak also to your Lordship about
the papers which have been taken from me at St. Helena, as well as
respecting many other subjects to which I shall have to refer, either
with your Lordship or Lord Bathurst; but the short space of time that
I am allowed, and the confusion of ideas produced by circumstances so
sudden and unforeseen, oblige me to defer doing so to some future
period.

“I shall anxiously await the answer which your Lordship may be pleased
to give me; but where I know not; most probably at Brussels, if I am
allowed to remain there.

                          “I have the honour,” &c.

I was put on board a packet, and we sailed for Ostend; and, as I have
now and then taken the liberty to speak of physical sufferings, I
shall be forgiven, if, in order to afford a more correct idea of what
I must have suffered during my long passage, I observe here that,
notwithstanding the hundred days which I had just passed at sea, I
still happened to be sick again on board this packet, although the
weather was not absolutely bad. This was undoubtedly very ridiculous,
but no less true.

The next day I got to Ostend, and landed without any observation
having been made to me by any person. I again thought that this time
my misfortunes were at an end, and that I had recovered my liberty;
but I was again mistaken; persecutions of another kind were, on the
contrary, going to begin: however, I had every reason to be satisfied
with the first moments of my residence.

I had not been long at the inn before an agent of the local
authorities came and told me, without my being able to guess how I had
been already found out, that he had received orders to watch over me,
and that he had immediately come to ask me in what manner I wished him
to fulfil his instructions.

I had not been accustomed to such polite manner for a length of time,
and I made this observation to him; adding, that the step he had taken
was quite sufficient to induce me to resign myself with entire
confidence to whatever he might wish to do with me; and, as his
politeness had led to a prolongation of the conversation between us,
which seemed greatly to excite his curiosity, he soon told me that he
was going to put a question to me which was indiscreet, no doubt, and
perhaps improper; but that he could not resist his desire of being
informed whether it was true that I had left Napoleon because he was
so much soured by misfortune that it was impossible to live with him;
for the English ministerial papers had circulated a thousand reports
respecting me, one more ridiculous than the other. I replied to him
with a smile, “Sir, if I had any thing to say against Napoleon, if I
had the least subject of complaint to adduce against him, be assured
that you would not have to guard me at this moment, and that I should
be far from being ill treated any where.” Upon which he exclaimed in
his turn, striking his forehead, that such was the answer which ought
to have suggested itself to his mind. His attentions towards me after
this explanation became still more marked; and, having learnt from me
that it was my intention to go to Brussels, he imposed no other
condition to the uncontrolled liberty which he left me than that of
not taking my departure without informing him of it, assuring me at
the same time that a determination respecting me could not be delayed
twenty-four hours longer, as a courier had been despatched to the
Governor of the province, whose return would, in all probability, set
me entirely at liberty.

I took advantage of the delay, to which I was thus obliged to submit,
to write to the Ministers of the Police of France and of the
Netherlands, respectively, concerning the situation in which I was
henceforth to be placed.

To the French Minister I wrote in the following manner.

“Sir,—I think it right, on landing on the Continent, to inform your
Excellency of the circumstances in which I am placed; and I trust that
you will approve the motives that induce me to do so.

“A year ago, I was suddenly removed from Longwood, and have been,
since that period, carried from shore to shore like a captive. On
entering the Thames, I received an order to depart instantly to the
Continent, having no other choice allowed to me but to proceed either
to Calais or Ostend.

“A feeling of delicacy and prudence has prompted me to prefer Ostend.

“France is, of all countries, that where my appearance is most likely
to be watched, and I have wished to spare the department over which
you preside, and myself, the inconveniencies attending such a measure.
This double consideration has induced me to adopt the cruel resolution
of self-banishment. I have also been actuated by another motive, viz.
the hope of possessing in this country greater facilities (setting
aside all political views, influenced only by private and personal
feelings of affection), for procuring through the legal channel
allowed by the English regulations, and even under the cover of the
British Ministers, some alleviation and innocent consolations for the
martyrs at Longwood. In France, this pious and sacred care might have
been misinterpreted, and might consequently have given rise to
impediments.

“I hope that a statement so open and candid will remove all
unfavourable impressions that might have been suggested to your mind
by the circumstances of my case; and, in furtherance of that object, I
now take the liberty of enclosing under cover to you, an unsealed
letter for my wife, in whose favour I request the interposition of
your kindness, in any thing relating to your functions, that may
facilitate the means of her coming to share my voluntary exile.
Receive,” &c.

To the Minister of the Netherlands I wrote, that it is usual to
endeavour to escape from being rendered subject to superintendence;
but that I, on the contrary, came to request to be placed under his. I
repeated to him, as in the preceding letter, what had happened to me
in the Thames, and that I had been thrown on the Continent without any
motive having been adduced, or any cause assigned for this measure.

I informed him that I had just written to the Minister of the Police
of France, to lay before him the motives which induced me to expose
myself to voluntary exile. I represented to him that I was very ill,
and that the state of my son’s health was most alarming; that I had
just made a passage of a hundred days’ duration in a very small
vessel—that I was entirely ignorant as to whether my wife and family
were still in existence—that I was totally in the dark respecting the
state of my domestic concerns; and, taking all these circumstances
into consideration, I entreated him to allow me to reside for a few
days at Brussels, to breathe and look around me, to send for my wife,
and have the benefit of the attendance of a physician; adding that,
perhaps, in the mean time, the British Ministers, whose harsh and
precipitate conduct towards me must necessarily have been founded on
some error, would consent to allow me to be present, agreeably to my
request, at the examination of the papers which they had taken from
me.

In conclusion, I assured him that I entertained no political views or
feelings, that my sentiments were solely sentiments of individual
affection and personal attachment; that such sentiments were natural
and honourable, and that my open avowal of them must afford a perfect
security that they were not calculated to give any cause of
uneasiness.

I owe it to justice and to gratitude to state that my letter to the
Minister of the Police of France had at least the effect of obtaining
from him, when occasion offered, all that might be expected from a
gentleman.

Such was not the case with respect to the Minister of the Netherlands;
the only answer I received from him was the arrival of guards to
secure my person. Orders were sent in every direction to find me out
again, for they thought I was lost. As I had been told by the person
intrusted with the superintendence over me, the permission from the
Governor to continue my journey soon arrived, and I had immediately
taken advantage of it; choosing, on account of the weak state of my
health, the easy, but obscure and slow, conveyance of the barges and
canals. This had not been thought of; and they were seeking for me at
a great distance from Ostend, whilst I was still almost at its gates.
My unsuspecting confidence and security had baffled all their
calculations; they had not yet got the exact description of my person,
and were consequently much embarrassed to know me; however, I myself
soon put an end to their perplexity by throwing myself up, as the
saying is, into the wolf’s jaws.

My first step, after my arrival at Brussels, which I reached late in
the evening, after a journey of three days, was to send to inform the
police of my being in that city, and ask what had been the
determination of the Minister relative to my case, in consequence of
the letter which I had addressed to him from Ostend. The generous
answer to my innocent confidence was, to send instantly to surround
the inn where I was, and they waited with impatience the first dawn of
day to signify to me that I must leave the kingdom of the Netherlands
without the least delay. I was very much indisposed, and had some
degree of fever about me; nevertheless, I vainly appealed to their
compassion, and asked to be allowed to stay one day longer.

Very serious obstacles must certainly have existed to my being
permitted to sojourn in Brussels, or a predisposition to treat me with
cruelty, for I was not allowed even one hour. They placed me in a
carriage between a police officer and a gendarme, and turned me on the
high road. These people, who saw my condition, took compassion upon
me, and after a few hours’ journey consented to stop, in order that I
might procure a little rest and some requisite medical attendance; but
under the express condition that I should resume my journey at an
early hour on the following morning, in charge of the guards appointed
to succeed them; a system that was strictly acted upon and repeated in
every town, notwithstanding the repeated observations and the
testimony of all medical men. This cruel treatment compelled me to
complain to the French Ambassador at the court of the Netherlands, who
I thought would warmly resist such a proceeding; for it was an insult
to his public character to treat in this manner, without any just
motive, and in direct violation of the laws, a Frenchman who was
placed under his protection. I therefore informed him of the vexatious
and inhuman conduct which was then exercised towards me.

I told him “that, upon landing at Ostend I had written to the French
Minister of Police, to state to him my motives for remaining out of
France; that I had also written at the same time to the Minister of
the Police of the Netherlands, requesting he would allow me to sojourn
a short time in Brussels, and that, having reached that city at a late
hour, without having been guarded or placed under any superintendence,
I had hastened to inform his Excellency of my arrival; but that I had
been suddenly awaked before day-light on the following morning, and
surrounded by four police officers and two gendarmes, who signified to
me that I must instantly depart, notwithstanding the very precarious
state of my health; that I had in vain demanded a physician to verify
my case; that I had been told that I should be allowed one for form’s
sake, but that I must depart, whatever might be his opinion; that, in
fact, I had been removed to Louvain like a malefactor, and in the last
stage of sickness, under the escort of a gendarme and of a police
officer; that, having arrived in this town during the night, suffering
from increased illness, covered with blisters, and in a state of
fever, I had asked to be allowed to stop the following day; that the
Burgomaster had been inhuman enough to refuse my request, in spite of
two or three very strong medical certificates; that, having demanded
that the physician at least might accompany me in the carriage,
instead of the gendarme, who could follow on horseback, this favour
had also been refused me; that all that could be allowed, they said,
was that the physician should accompany me in another carriage. This
was, no doubt, a piece of irony.”

I added, “that I was quite certain such treatment could not proceed
from him who alone, however, on this occasion, would have a right to
exercise any influence over my fate; that I was too well acquainted
with the sentiments of the nation to which we belonged to suppose for
a moment that his instructions could decree the proscription of a
person towards whom there neither was, nor could be, any law or motive
for such a proceeding; that the ill usage I experienced could
therefore only proceed from the authorities of this country, where
however, in common justice, I ought not to be considered in any other
light than as a traveller; that as such I would demand of them what
was my crime, and what were their rights over my person.” And I
concluded by placing my interests under his care, as his situation
made him their natural protector; and, with a view to call his
attention more particularly to me, I gave him news of Madame Bertrand,
his wife’s sister, which I had received just as I was leaving Dover,
and I offered myself, in case Madame de Latour Dupin wished to say any
thing to her sister, to whom it would afford the greatest pleasure, to
take charge of it, as I proposed to write to Madame Bertrand regularly
once a month, by the channel which the English regulations allowed,
viz., under the very cover of Ministers.

His Excellency made no reply to this letter; his endeavours, no doubt,
proved unavailing; the impulse, the very orders, perhaps, emanated at
this time from the other side of the water.

I continued in this manner, without intermission, transferred from
town to town, from one police officer to another, from gendarme to
gendarme, across the whole kingdom of the Netherlands; and when I
occasionally asked, in the height of my sufferings, what could be the
motive for such harsh treatment, I was simply told, in reply, that
such were the orders that had been given; and, in fact, this was all
that appeared to be known on the subject. Arrived at Aix-la-Chapelle,
on the Prussian territory, I was there exchanged by the Agents of the
Netherlands for a receipt, as might have been done with a bale of
goods; and the Prussians, in their turn, hurried me along with equal
rapidity from place to place, from officer to officer, and from one
gendarme to another; and when I enquired of them also the motive of
all this, they candidly answered that they did not know; but that I
had been thrown into their country, and that they were going to throw
me out of it. If I asked to stop, they politely replied that they
would not keep me upon their territory; and some friends, for it will
hereafter be seen that I found friends every where, whispered in my
ear that I ought to thank God for it, and above all things, to take
immediate advantage of this piece of good fortune, as some exiled
Frenchmen had lately been forced to the shores of the Baltic, and shut
up in fortresses. I then declared that I desired to go to Frankfort,
an expression which appeared to give pleasure to my hosts, the
Prussians, as they said it would no longer concern them. After what I
had just learnt, I was equally rejoiced at this upon my own account.

After having described, but very feebly, all the savage brutality that
had just been exercised upon me, all the vexations and sufferings that
I had endured, it would be unjust and ungrateful in me, and I should
be depriving myself of the most gratifying sensation, were I to omit
mentioning the kind of compensation which I found at every step of my
journey.

My story had made a great noise; it had spread in every direction; it
preceded me; the public papers had laid hold of it. It was known whom
I had served, to whom I had wished to devote my care, for whom I
suffered; and all endeavoured to mark their sense of my conduct. All
classes were eager to evince every mark of attention and sympathy
towards me; and open demonstrations, or secret offers, awaited me
every where. It was then that those words of Napoleon’s occurred to my
mind, which I have, by the way, had many subsequent occasions to recal
to my recollection: “My dear friends, when you shall have returned to
Europe, you will find that, from this spot, I still bestow crowns.”
And can there be a nobler, a more precious one, than the esteem, the
affection, the sympathy, of those even who know you not, and have
never seen you! What hand, however powerful, can bestow any thing of
equal value! These feelings manifested themselves at inns, upon the
high-roads, every where. Postboys, gendarmes, all that I met with on
my journey, addressed me with a kind of pride and exultation. One
said, “I belonged to the Imperial Guard;” another, “I was a French
gendarme;” a third, “I have been a soldier under Napoleon.” These
recollections, and the feelings of good-will to which they gave rise,
appeared in all classes and conditions. Twice, in Belgium, offers were
made to rescue me, every thing having been, I was informed, carefully
prepared beforehand; the same offer had already been made to me at the
Cape, by an American Captain; and a similar proposal was made to me at
a later period, on the part of some Englishmen, to whom I was quite
unknown, and who had resolved to come from London in order to carry me
off from Frankfort, where they thought me in a much worse situation
than I really was. But I invariably replied—“What end would it answer?
Why should I injure so noble a cause?”

The very agents of authority felt an anxiety concerning my fate, and a
kind of interest for me. One of them, although appointed to watch me,
offered to take charge of any paper that I would venture to intrust to
his care; I availed myself of his offer, as I did not see any
inconvenience in so doing, even if he had some bad intention, as he
might possibly have, and I addressed, to a person of high rank in
England, a letter of half a dozen lines, describing with warmth the
ill usage which the British Ministers had made me suffer for the last
twelve months, and requesting that he would publish my statement, if
he saw no objection to it. I enclosed, with the same view, that part
of the Emperor’s letter which I had been allowed to copy, adding that
I should have continued to to keep it to myself, had not the
ridiculous and insulting reports, which were inserted in the
newspapers, rendered it imperative upon me to make it public. I,
however, left to his discretion to decide what should be done.

How great was my surprise to see the whole published in the Belgic
papers two days afterwards! I was extremely mortified at it; it was
not at all consistent with my disposition to wish to make so much
noise. I was, above all, especially hurt that the person in England to
whom I addressed my letter, and to whom I was unknown, should receive
it only through the public press: this mode of proceeding was also
totally inconsistent with my manners. I was at a loss to conceive how
the thing could have happened. I have since learnt that my confident,
in the warmth of his zeal, had consulted with two or three persons of
the same way of thinking, and that, the papers having been read in
their little council, they had decided that, instead of losing time in
sending them to England, where, perhaps, no use would be made of them,
it would be better to publish them instantly upon the spot, where
indeed they created a very lively sensation. Notwithstanding the
trouble that I then suffered from them, they proved eventually of the
most signal advantage to me.

In short, there would be no end to it were I to mention the affecting
marks of attention that were shewn to me; the offers of all kinds, in
money, clothes, &c.; even people of the very lowest class were eager
to tender their mite. One of them, forcing his way into my apartment,
from which he was pulled back by the gendarmes, cried out to me that
he had only two coats; that he saw, by my size, that the second would
not fit me; that he was therefore going to sell it, and would throw me
the amount through the window. What sufferings, what torments would
not be effaced by the sensations which such acts must produce!

I was, however, so ill, on arriving at Cologne, that it was found
necessary to allow me to stop twenty-four hours in that town. This
increase of suffering turned out a fortunate circumstance for me. I
was in a gentle sleep when, on a sudden, the _valet de place_ rushed
into my apartment, with demonstrations of that joy which the bearer of
good news is sure to occasion and even to experience, and announced to
me Madame de Las Cases. I had not yet been able to ascertain whether
she was alive, and therefore thought that I had misunderstood the man,
or was dreaming; but a moment afterwards, the door was thrown open—it
was she herself!




                         RESIDENCE IN GERMANY.


            FROM THE TIME OF MY ARRIVAL AT FRANKFORT TO THE
                  PERIOD OF MY RESIDENCE AT OFFENBACH.

                                -------

                      A Space of Fifteen Months.

_Residence at Frankfort.—My endeavours to alleviate the Situation of
    the Inhabitants of Longwood.—Letters to Maria Louisa and to the
    Allied Sovereigns.—My Letter to Lord Bathurst.—Petition to the
    British Parliament.—Transactions with several Members of the
    Emperor’s Family.—Measures to supply the Wants of Longwood;
    Details, &c.—Journey to Baden.—Residence at Manheim; Motives for
    this choice.—Congress at Aix-la-Chapelle; my Efforts;
    Details.—Letter from Madame Mère, &c.—Note to the Sovereigns.—New
    Official Documents received from Longwood, and addressed to the
    Sovereigns; new Efforts; &c.—State of Public Opinion.—Arrival of
    the brig Musquito.—Fresh Vexation; the Minister of Baden orders me
    to leave Manheim.—I retire to Offenbach._

The band of captives arrived at last at Frankfort, after having, for
fifteen days, undergone persecutions almost unexampled in civilized
countries, and in a state of tranquillity. A Prussian officer, whose
duty, he politely said, was not so much to guard me as to see that I
was well treated, had conducted me thither. He did not allow me to
communicate freely with any person, and was not to leave me until some
authentic and final decision had been adopted with respect to me.

On arriving at Frankfort, I immediately sent to our Ambassador, as I
had done in the Netherlands, the following letter:

SIR,—I have the honour, on arriving in this town, to claim the
protection of your public character, against the rigorous measures
which have been pursued for some time past in regard to me.

I have been arrested, and am carried about from town to town, under
escort, against my will, like a captive. Those who act thus candidly
confess that they only push me on in that manner, because I have been
so brought to them; and they have not any special motive or positive
order on the subject. On my passage through the Netherlands, I
addressed a representation on the subject to our ambassador at the
court of the Hague; but I have been hurried on so precipitately that
it has not been possible for me to receive any answer. I take the
liberty of sending you a copy of the letter which I addressed to him,
in order to put your Excellency in possession of the first details of
my adventure.

It is now, Sir, the hundred and thirtieth day of my travels; I am
harrassed, tired, sick, and infirm; I have been tossed by the fury of
the waves, and must perish at last if I cannot find a port. In the
name of humanity and justice, I implore to be allowed to take breath
for a moment. I have found an erroneous impression existing every
where in my way: and those who thus disposed of my person have all
expressed the greatest surprise, when the discussion of the point has
proved that there did not exist in France any law or act, either
public or private, directed against me; and that nothing had ever
occurred which could give rise to such a proceeding. I request, Sir,
that you will be kind enough to prevent, by your testimony, the
possibility of an error that might influence the decision to be taken
with respect to me; and that you will grant me that protection which I
am naturally entitled to expect from you in your public character.

                                              I have the honour, &c.

P.S. I think it right to inform your Excellency that, in the
perplexity of my situation, I wrote a few days since to His Majesty
the Emperor of Austria, to request an asylum in his dominions, should
my liberty be placed under any restraint. But a distant country, the
language and manners of which are quite new to me, cannot suit me,
except in case of necessity. I should wish to be as near to France as
possible, in order to be able to see my family, and attend to my
domestic concerns, which have been neglected for the last three years;
and Brussels, which, in addition to these advantages, possesses that
of the language which would enable me to superintend the education of
my children, is the place in which I should be happy to reside. I have
requested M. Latour Dupin, at the Hague, to obtain the necessary
permission to enable me to do so, and I earnestly entreat you to
assist him, as far as it lies in your power.

The same thing that had happened in the Netherlands happened also at
Frankfort; I received no answer to my letter. But his Excellency did
not remain idle with respect to me, and I have been assured that he
had immediately required from the senate of this free and sovereign
city my removal within the space of twenty-four hours. Fortunately the
Prussian officer, who was obliged to follow me, and who did not relish
such a continuation of our journey, induced the Minister from his
court to interfere, in order that I might be allowed to remain at
Frankfort.

From that instant every thing became calm, and the tide of British
persecution which, rolling from afar, had so long harassed my
existence, was at last stopped. The senate allowed me to reside in
Frankfort, and the Prussian officer took his departure. Politeness now
succeeded to churlishness: Prince Hardenberg, to whom I had written to
complain of my arrest in the Rhenish provinces, replied that he had
been very angry about it himself. An answer came from Vienna, most
graciously granting the asylum which I had demanded. I was now free,
and I acquired also the hope of seeing my liberty respected for the
future; for the Duke de Richelieu, Minister for Foreign Affairs, to
whom our Ambassador at Frankfort applied respecting me, answered, I
was told, “that I should be left unmolested.”

The Duke de Richelieu, feeling his independence, had no doubt only
followed the impulse of his natural generosity, whereas it must be
presumed that these sentiments were restrained in the breast of our
Ambassador at Frankfort by the necessity of giving pledges of his
fidelity, having been formerly Napoleon’s minister at the court of
King Jerome. This line of conduct was very proper on his part, no
doubt; but I had a right to think it unfortunate that it had, on this
occasion, been pursued at my expense.

My first care, as soon as I was at liberty to dispose of my actions,
was entirely directed to the grand motive which had caused my
departure from St. Helena, and brought me back to Europe. Though
repulsed from London, on which I had founded my strongest hopes, I
nevertheless embraced with ardour the means that were still left to
me.

I first wrote to Maria Louisa, as in duty bound, and addressed my
letter to her, unsealed and under cover to Prince Metternich,
principal Minister of Austria. I afterwards wrote to the three Allied
Sovereigns. I transcribe here those letters:

          LETTER TO MARIA LOUISA, WRITTEN AT THE CAPE OF GOOD
                     HOPE, AND FORWARDED TO EUROPE.

MADAM,—I have no sooner left St. Helena than I think it my duty to
hasten to lay at the feet of your Majesty some intelligence from your
august consort. I have been suddenly torn from his presence, without
any previous notice, and as it were struck with sudden death at his
side, without the possibility of his having forseen such an event. I
am not therefore fortunate enough to be intrusted with any special
message for your Majesty; and it is from his every-day habits and
conversation that I must collect what details I shall presume to
transmit to your Majesty.

Indifferent to public events, the Emperor Napoleon most frequently
indulged in the contemplation of his family recollections and
affections. He was grieved at not having ever received, although he
had officially demanded it of those who guard him, any news from those
who are most dear to him. Your Majesty will find the lively expression
of that regret traced by the hand of your illustrious consort in the
letter which he did me the honour to write me, after I had been
separated from him, a copy of which I shall take the liberty of laying
before your Majesty.[30]

Footnote 30:

  See the Letter from the Emperor Napoleon to Count Las Cases, after
  his removal from Longwood.

The health of the Emperor, at my departure, was very much impaired,
and his situation was most painful in every respect, being exposed to
numerous wants, and deprived of every enjoyment. Fortunately, his mind
triumphed over every thing, and remained calm and serene.

I have seen him obliged, every month, to sell part of his plate, to
supply his daily wants, and he has been reduced to the necessity of
accepting a small sum, which a faithful servant was fortunate enough
to have at his disposal in England, when he left him.

Madam, guided by the sentiments which fill my heart, I take the
liberty, as a devoted servant, to lay at the feet of your Majesty, in
the hope of being agreeable to you, a sacrifice which is dear to me,
being some hair of your august consort, which has been a long time in
my possession. I presume also to send at the same time to your Majesty
a plan of Longwood, drawn by my son for his mother. Your Majesty will
no doubt feel interested in examining this remote desert in its
details.

On arriving in Europe, my first step would be to throw myself at the
feet of your Majesty, if a sacred duty did not oblige me to remain in
England, in order to devote every instant of my life to endeavour to
impart, through the means allowed by the British regulations, some
consolation to the inhabitants of that horrible rock, which retains
for ever the object of my most tender cares. The British Ministers
will not refuse to allow me to undertake this pious occupation. I
shall solicit it with ardour, and fulfil it with loyalty. I am, &c.

                                                   COUNT DE LAS CASES.

P. S. On my arrival in Europe, Madam, I have been ejected by England,
arrested on the Continent, detained by sickness at Frankfort, and have
just obtained an asylum in the dominions of your august father. I take
advantage of the first moment of my liberty, to address to your
Majesty the above letter, that was written for you at the extremity of
Africa, at a distance of three thousand leagues. I entreat your
Majesty to deign to receive it favourably, and that will be some
consolation for my sufferings.

              LETTER TO PRINCE METTERNICH, CONTAINING THE
                               PRECEDING.

PRINCE,—I hasten to offer to your Highness my sincere thanks for the
favour of an asylum obtained in the dominions of his Majesty the
Emperor.

I take the liberty at the same time to enclose, under cover to you, a
letter for her Majesty Maria Louisa. And here, Prince, I entreat you
to allow me to lay aside the public character with which your highness
is invested, to address you in your private character only. I wish to
ask for advice rather than to accomplish an act. Having been so long
absent from Europe, I might unknowingly and unwillingly transgress the
rules of expediency. I give myself up to the effusion of my heart.

Prince, the result of these different feelings has been to induce me
to confide the letter which I enclose herein, unsealed, to your
discretion and personal judgment. It is again the result of these same
feelings which impels me to represent to you the Emperor Napoleon a
prey on his rock to the persecution of personal enemies, and abandoned
by all the rest of the world. Henceforth I shall live only in the hope
of affording him some sources of consolation. From a daily intercourse
of eighteen months, and, I may say, from some moments of unreserved
confidence, I know those that would be most dear to him. And who can
know Napoleon better than I do? He already feels and converses on the
subjects of the past events of his own history, as if they had
happened three hundred years ago. He remains unchanged only with
respect to family feelings. Whatever political events may have
occurred, he entertains no doubts on the score of domestic sentiments.
How, through what channels, by what means, could I, without
transgressing the rules of expediency, or any regulations and
intentions, obtain direct intelligence concerning his wife and his
son? Prince, I again repeat that this communication is from man to
man: it is one heart questioning another.

During my residence at St. Helena, we have not had any intercourse,
nor been able to have any with the Commissioner from Austria. Your
Highness must have read in a public document,[31] written in answer to
the Governor, that, _if the Austrian and Russian Commissioners had
been sent to see that Napoleon was treated in a proper manner, and
with the respect due to him, this measure was in harmony with the
character of their Sovereigns; but that the Governor, having declared
that they had no right or authority to interfere on the subject, had
by that declaration rendered them inadmissible_. At the same time,
Napoleon publicly said that he would willingly receive them as private
individuals, yet we have not seen them; be it that such was the tenor
of their instructions, or, as I have more reason to suppose, that the
Governor wished to subject them, as private individuals, to
restrictions which would have degraded their character.

Your Highness will see by the copy of a letter, transcribed for her
Majesty Maria Louisa, the severity used towards an Austrian botanist,
and how much the Emperor Napoleon was hurt by that circumstance. I
again repeat to your Highness the expression of the nature of my
sentiments, and the assurance of the high respect with which I am, &c.

                                                 COUNT DE LAS CASES.

P. S. In case my Letter for her Majesty Maria Louisa should not be
delivered to her, I request your Highness will do me the particular
favour to cause the hair which is enclosed in it to be returned to me.

Footnote 31:

  Letter from Count Montholon in answer to Sir Hudson Lowe.

              LETTER TO HIS MAJESTY THE EMPEROR OF RUSSIA.

SIRE,—A sentiment, a sacred duty, brings me to the feet of your
Majesty.

The zealous and faithful servant of a royal victim of adversity
presumes to lift up his voice to your throne, surrounded by every
prosperity which fortune can bestow; will you refuse to hear him?

Unexpectedly torn from Napoleon, and, as it were, struck with sudden
death at his side, I have since wandered as in another universe,
pursued every where by the recollection of sufferings which I have
witnessed and can no longer share.

It is at your feet, Sire, that my heart prompts me to seek for an
alleviation of my affliction, for encouragement to my hope.

Your treaty of the 2nd August, 1815, with your illustrious Allies,
stipulates that Napoleon is your prisoner, and abandons to England the
possession of his person, and the care and necessary measures of his
detention.

I shall not say any thing against that treaty, Sire; I shall not even
complain of the manner in which the British Ministers execute that
part of the treaty which you have intrusted to their care.

The high interests of politics, the great grievances, however they may
weigh upon my heart, are at this moment far from my thoughts; domestic
cares alone occupy my breast.

I therefore implore your Majesty, as I have implored your high
Allies,[32] to deign to protect the request which I address to the
English Government, to be allowed to devote myself in London to the
care of procuring for the illustrious captive, through the means
allowed by the laws and regulations, some moral enjoyments, and some
physical comforts, which will not be a burden to any body.

Footnote 32:

  Similar letters had been addressed to the Emperor of Austria and to
  the King of Prussia, varied only in some particulars, as the
  individual circumstances of these Princes respectively required.

My request, Sire, is an innocent favour, natural and simple, and
against which no reasonable objection can be raised; indeed, I am not
without strong claims on your Majesty’s attention. You are far from
being a stranger to them.

In abandoning to others the custody and detention of the captive, your
Majesty has certainly not renounced your right of superintendence over
the marks of attention and respect due to his sacred person. In
renouncing all political interposition, your Majesty has not intended
to preclude yourself from contributing to the consolations approved by
your individual sentiments, and to those alleviations which do not
interfere with the principal object, in view.

Every day, Sire, at St. Helena, chains are imposed, and their weight
is aggravated in your name. Can you, Sire, have allowed your name to
reach that spot, only to authorize odious and intolerable acts of
severity?

He upon whom these acts are inflicted, Sire, is the same to whom you
long gave the name of _brother_. Your royal heart cannot forget it, it
cannot remain insensible. I therefore appeal, in order to obtain a
small favour, to your sympathy, to your recollections, and even to
your dignity. Your magnanimous mind, Sire, has shewn itself too much
the friend of public morality, it has displayed too much private
delicacy and generosity in its various bearings, to allow me to doubt
for an instant of success.

And what is, Sire, once more, the object for which I require your
protection? Merely to be allowed to be near the place of communication
and conveyance, that is, on the spot the most favourable, and in the
situation the most proper, to be able, according to the prescribed
forms and regulations, to continue from afar those domestic cares
which I am no longer allowed to exercise in the prison itself: that is
all.

Nevertheless, Sire, I implore and expect this favour from your
Majesty. And how happy should I be if your Majesty should deign to add
to it that of confiding to my care that part of the private and moral
interest which your great engagements cannot have compelled you to
renounce. And who better than myself, Sire, could fulfil that duty?
Who could devote himself to it with more ardour? I have banished
myself from my native country, in order to be able to give up to that
purpose the rest of my life without interruption or restraint. Deign,
Sire, to listen to me, and comply with my request, I beseech you. And
on whom are these cares to be bestowed? In whose favour do I solicit
to be allowed to sacrifice myself? Sire, it is in favour of the man
whom you once called your friend.

The reign of your Majesty is sufficiently distinguished by prodigies
and monuments of glory; with these, history is already provided; let
it also record acts of more exalted virtue; do something for
friendship!—Let history say of you: In the midst of the most violent
political contest that ever existed, he set the example of something
still greater than victory—he remembered, he respected, the feelings
of ancient friendship!

How many times, on our rock, have I heard the Emperor Napoleon
conversing on the past events of his life, as if they had occurred
several centuries ago, and, already speaking the language of history,
say: _I never had any war with the Emperor Alexander but a political
one; that war had nothing to do with our individual feelings: I cannot
suppose him to feel any personal animosity against me_. A circumstance
which would be worthy of you, Sire, tended to confirm him in this
opinion. A report reached us on our rock that the Commissioner of your
Majesty at St. Helena had, at the end of his instructions, a
recommendation, written by your Majesty’s own hand, enjoining him most
positively to shew the same marks of respect to the Emperor Napoleon
as are shewn to yourself. We took pleasure in repeating this report to
him; we were aware that he was pleased by it. Such a proceeding was in
harmony with the character of your Majesty, and we believed in it
without, however, having had it in our power to convince ourselves of
its truth; for (during my stay, at least) we never could hold any
communication with the Commissioner of your Majesty. You will
doubtless have heard that Napoleon being required by the Governor of
St. Helena to receive the Commissioner of your Majesty, and that of
your illustrious ally, the Emperor of Austria, ordered the following
answer to be given: _That if those Commissioners were ordered by their
Masters to take care that, in an island in the midst of the ocean,
remote from the rest of the world, he should be treated with the
respect due to him, he recognised in that measure the character of
these two Princes; that the Governor having declared that they had no
right to interfere in any thing that happened on that rock, they from
that moment were without an official character in his eyes_. He,
however, added that he should be happy to see them as private
individuals; but this message remained without effect, either from
their having never been apprized of it, or from their instructions not
allowing them to take advantage of it; or lastly, perhaps (and I do
not think it at all improbable), because the English Governor wished
in that case to subject them to certain conditions which were
inconsistent with their character.

If I have thus presumed, Sire, to raise my humble voice to your
Majesty, my temerity was inspired by the entire, ardent, and
unalterable devotion which I cherish for him who once reigned over me,
who was my master ... and that sentiment will plead in my favour in
the eyes of your Majesty.

                    I am, &c.

                                                   COUNT DE LAS CASES.

With a heart still oppressed by all the ill usage I had experienced,
proceeding from the British Government, I deemed it incumbent upon me,
and a public duty as it were, to complain to Lord Bathurst in the
following letter, which, by the way, was kept secret for upwards of
ten months, and might have remained so for ever, had not Mr. Goulburn,
Under Secretary of State, by certain misplaced and incorrect
assertions which he made in the House of Commons concerning me, as
will hereafter be seen, compelled me in some degree to publish it.
This circumstance, however, is an additional pledge to the reader of
the authenticity and correctness of all the facts which I have stated.

             LETTER OF COUNT DE LAS CASES TO LORD BATHURST.

MY LORD,—Were I to bear in silence the arbitrary and tyrannical acts,
the infraction of the laws, the contempt of all forms, the violation
of principles, of which I have been a victim, for upwards of a year
that I have been in the hands of your agents, my silence might be
construed into a tacit acquiescence, which would render me guilty
towards myself, towards you, and towards society at large. Towards
myself, because I have ample cause to seek for redress; towards you,
who are ignorant of my grounds of complaint, and might perhaps hasten
to grant me that redress; and towards society, on whose behalf every
upright man ought sternly to resist the encroachments of power, for
the honour of the laws, and for the protection of those who come after
him.

My Lord, if I have so long delayed stating my grievances to you, the
blame attaches to yourself, to the persecution that has assailed me
upon your shores, and to that to which you have given the impulse in
neighbouring countries. It would appear, in fact, as if a species of
torment had been invented for me; a deportation along the high roads.
I have been carried from town to town like a malefactor, though I was
in a dying state, without any motive having been assigned for such
conduct, and without being allowed to take any rest. How then was it
possible for me to write to you?

If I now address your Lordship personally respecting what concerns me,
it is because all the acts of which I have to complain have
originated, and have been continued, in your department, and under
your name; and if other hands have since oppressed me, I am indebted
to your Lordship for being placed within their reach, and to your
suggestions for the treatment which they have inflicted upon me.

My Lord, I am one of the four to which your orders at Plymouth had
reduced the number of those who eagerly sought the happiness and glory
of following the illustrious victim of the _dreadful hospitality of
the Bellerophon_; I followed my sacred occupation at Longwood to the
best of my power; all the faculties of my heart and soul were engaged
in soothing the bitterest captivity ever known, when the Governor of
St. Helena suddenly tore me away from that island. Perhaps he was
right: I had infringed his regulations. But, after all, I was guilty
of no other crime than that of using the right, which every prisoner
possesses, of endeavouring without any scruple to deceive the
vigilance of his gaoler; for between us nothing had been left to
delicacy, confidence, or honour. I have not complained of the
proceedings enforced against me. I was only grieved at the
uncalled-for insult inflicted upon him from whom I was separated. It
was almost by his side, almost under his eye, that I was arrested; on
which occasion he wrote, what you no doubt will have read, that,
seeing me from his windows hurried off on the plain, in the midst of
waving plumes and horses prancing around me, he had fancied he saw the
savages of the South Sea, who, in their ferocious joy, dance round the
victim whom they are about to devour.

My Lord, it was natural for me to believe that the cause of what has
happened to me, the confiding of secret documents to my servant at his
own request, was but the result of a snare laid for me. The Governor
himself agreed with me that appearances might justify my suspicion;
but he gave me his word of honour that he had nothing to do in the
business, and I believed him. It had originally been intended,
however, that those secret documents should pass through the
Governor’s hands; they would have been addressed to him, if he had not
informed me, a short time before, that if I continued to write in the
same style he would separate me from him to whom I devoted my
existence. So true is this assertion, and so unimportant in themselves
were the documents, that they have never since been mentioned; they
have remained entirely unconnected with the event to which they gave
rise.[33]

Footnote 33:

  Unless this should be what a Minister intended to allude to in the
  British Parliament, on the 14th May, 1818. Endeavouring to justify
  the persecutions exercised against Count de Las Cases, he said that
  he had been found out in an attempt to establish a correspondence in
  Europe through the medium of England. But the noble Lord only made
  the assertion orally, and refused to exhibit the official documents
  that would have afforded a proof of it. An opinion may be formed on
  this subject from this latter circumstance.

My Lord, my captivity in St. Helena was only voluntary. According to
your own regulation, it was to cease at my pleasure. As soon,
therefore, as I found myself separated from Longwood, I signified to
Sir Hudson Lowe, that I, from that moment, withdrew from his personal
control, and placed myself again under the protection of the civil and
general laws; that if I had committed any offence, I required to be
sent into the presence of my judges; that if he thought it necessary
to submit to the inspection of Ministers my papers, which I had given
him sufficient time to examine and to understand, I desired they might
be sent to you, my Lord, and that I might be sent with them. And in
order that he should have the less difficulty in taking this
determination, I represented to him the dreadful state of my health,
and the imminent danger of my son, which required our being sent to
where we might procure the first medical advice; and I further added
that I submitted willingly and unreservedly to every restriction,
however illegal, that your Lordship might deem it necessary to impose
upon me when I should have arrived in England. Sir Hudson Lowe did not
think himself at liberty to take this step; and, after he had long
hesitated, and had kept me a close prisoner in the Island for five or
six weeks, he at last sent me off to the Cape of Good Hope, according
to the letter of his instructions; a measure which he might and
certainly ought to have adopted within a few days after my arrest.
This Governor, at the same time, kept back such of my papers as he
thought proper, without allowing me to affix my seal to them, or he
would only allow me to do so under the derisive condition of my
express consent to his breaking the seal in my absence if he thought
proper, which was equivalent to a prohibition of sealing them at all.

By the aid of such subterfuges, Sir Hudson Lowe might likewise assert
that it was in my power to return to Longwood; it is true, that, being
urged by my arguments and by the delicacy of his position with respect
to me, he offered to let me go back thither, because that would have
released him from his embarrassment. But at the same time that he made
the offer, he rendered it impossible for me to accept it: ‘You have
disgraced me and dishonoured me,’ said I to him, ‘in arresting me in
Napoleon’s presence; I could no longer be an object of consolation to
him, but one rather that would bring painful and injurious
recollections to his mind. I could not appear again at Longwood except
at his express desire.’ I asked leave to write; I did even write to
inquire whether there existed such a wish; but Sir Hudson Lowe
insisted upon dictating or controlling the expressions of my letter,
and I was bound to refuse. His advantages were by far too great
already, placed as he was amongst close prisoners, whose actions he
separately directed at his will. Besides, if I even went back, he did
not consent to return me my papers. The very next day he might renew
upon me, or upon my unfortunate companions, the example of such
degrading acts of authority; I had the grief of having opened the door
to such an abuse of power, and my return would give to it the sanction
of precedent for the future: no alternative, was, therefore, left to
me, but to quit the Island with an aching heart.

I think, my Lord, I have stated to you every thing relating to my
affairs at St. Helena; this account is proved and developed in my
correspondence with Sir Hudson Lowe, all the documents of which,
carefully arranged and put in order by myself, were seized in the
Thames by your directions, and are at present in your possession.

My Lord, when I arrived at the Cape of Good Hope, I thought myself
better situated for enjoying the protection of your laws. Away from
the fatal island, where certain irregularities might perhaps find a
colouring in the importance of the motive which had occasioned them, I
found myself at a distance of five hundred leagues, in a quiet colony,
governed by the uncontrolled operation of your excellent laws, so
deservedly extolled. How great was my astonishment! Lord Charles
Somerset found no difficulty in doing at the Cape what Sir Hudson Lowe
had not dared to do at St. Helena—to detain me a prisoner. In vain I
made the same entreaties, and urged the same arguments; in vain I
offered the same concessions that I offered to Sir Hudson Lowe, in
order that I might be sent to your Lordship in Europe; all was
useless: he detained me. And this was an act of his own will and
caprice, for Sir Hudson Lowe was not his superior, and could not
therefore give him any orders. Lord Charles Somerset governed without
controul; he held a discretionary power; he could and ought to have
been a summary judge in my affair, but he constantly refused to listen
to me, rejected all explanation, and, notwithstanding my warm and
urgent representations, contented himself with coolly inquiring of my
natural judges, at a distance of three thousand leagues, whether he
should do right in sending me to them; thereby inflicting upon me,
from that moment, the most dreadful sentence that any tribunal could
ever have pronounced; an exile, and an imprisonment of seven or eight
months’ duration, separated by three thousand leagues from my family,
my private affairs, my country, my connexions, and all my affections.

My Lord, according to the sanctity of your laws, and to the principles
which have been transmitted to you by your forefathers, Lord Charles
Somerset has become guilty towards me of the greatest of crimes; a
crime which in the eyes of many people is equal to that of homicide,
and which, from the torments I have been made to endure, exceeds it in
mine. I denounce it to you, and demand justice at your hands. There is
not an Englishman, valuing his noble privileges, whose voice does not
unite with mine, and who does not form to himself a correct idea of
the torments I have suffered. In vain it will be alleged that the Cape
is but a colony governed by a military power, and still, to a certain
extent, by Dutch laws. My Lord, the justice and protection of the
British laws ought to reign wherever the British name extends. What
would be a crime on the banks of the Thames cannot be a matter of
indifference in a part of Africa over which the British standard
waves.

I was not a prisoner of war; I could only be a prisoner amenable to
the tribunals. To have kept me eight months separate from my judges is
a denial of justice that would make an Englishman shudder; to have
punished me without either trial or sentence is an act of tyranny
which is revolting to your legislation. What did I ask of Lord Charles
Somerset? Did I demand my liberty? No; I only requested that I might
be sent a prisoner to you, and undergo a trial, if there was cause for
one. But he sported in this instance with that which reason holds most
sacred, which is most pleasing to the heart, and dearest to man. What
could be his motives? What excuses could he plead? He constantly and
obstinately refused to give any. And here, my Lord, I desire it may be
understood that indignation and grief do not carry me so far as not to
distinguish in Lord Charles Somerset the private attentions with which
he endeavoured to soften my captivity from the infamy of the public
act by which he doomed me to it; although it is true that, towards the
end of my residence, the warmth of my expressions, and no doubt the
importunity of my appeals, exasperated him so far as to induce him to
keep me confined in the country, in spite of my entreaties and of the
deplorable state of my health, out of the daily reach of physicians
and medicines.

At last, my Lord, after a captivity of seven months, it was signified
to me, no doubt in consequence of orders arrived from your Lordship,
that I had only to procure a vessel to carry me to England. In vain I
asked that some opportunity might be selected, which would afford some
of those comforts which the distressing state of my health, and that
of my son, required; every suitable ship was refused me under some
pretence or other; and the choice that was left to me was reduced to
the only vessel on the eve of sailing; and even that was pointed out
to me by the Governor himself. I was compelled to embark in it as a
_prisoner_, and yet _at my own expense_; (this, by the way, appears a
little contradictory;) and in this brig, of the burden of two hundred
and thirty tons, and having a crew of twelve men, we had to endure a
voyage of nearly one hundred days, without a physician, and subject to
all the inconveniences, all the privations, all the evils, attendant
upon so small a vessel.

This, my Lord, is all that concerns my affair at the Cape of Good
Hope, the proof and particulars of which are to be found in my
correspondence with Lord Charles Somerset, which was seized in the
Thames by your orders, and is at present in your possession.

On reaching your shores, my Lord, I thought I had arrived at the end
of my troubles. On my arrival at the Cape, I had the honour of
addressing a letter to the Prince Regent, to implore his royal
protection; I had also written one to your Lordship upon the same
subject, and I had no doubt that the order given for my return was
owing to those letters. Already I felt my sufferings alleviated by the
pleasing prospect of seeing some friends I have in London, and of
resuming the management of my private affairs, which had been either
neglected, or totally ruined, during an absence of upwards of three
years; but what was my surprise! On arriving in the Thames, I was
instantly placed in solitary confinement, and had seals put upon my
papers. A few hours afterwards, one of your messengers came to seize
my person in the middle of the night, signified to me the order for my
being conveyed to the Continent, and conducted me to Dover for the
purpose of sending me thither. A delay of three days having occurred,
his zeal led him to turn this time to account: he restored my papers
to me; procured me every facility for writing; did all he could to
encourage me to write, and watched for the very last moment previous
to my departure, in order to make the most minute search after my
papers, and carry every one of them away, to the very last written
line. This, my Lord, is a kind of snare which I am far from
attributing to any other cause than to the baseness of the person who
laid it.

A similar circumstance had occurred at St. Helena. Sir Hudson Lowe,
after having kept me confined for five weeks, during which he had
allowed me every facility to write, wished at my departure to search
again amongst my papers; but it was sufficient for me to observe to
him how strange it would appear that he had afforded me the facility
of confiding to paper ideas which I should otherwise have kept within
my own breast. Sir Hudson Lowe instantly gave up the thought; it is an
acknowledgment which, in justice to the Governor, I am bound to make.

What appears most strange, my Lord, and what will hardly be credited,
is, that your messenger should have packed up all my papers, in spite
of my remonstrances, and have taken them away from me, without writing
down an inventory of them, or attending to any of the formalities
required by all received notions of jurisprudence throughout the
world. Persuaded that this deviation from first principles proceeded
from the ignorance of the subaltern, and not from the orders of the
Minister, I sought for your own interest, my Lord, to remedy the evil,
by obtaining, and hastening to affix my seal to the papers, in order
that you might rectify in time the errors of your agents. I am anxious
that your Lordship should appreciate the motive of this proceeding; it
was solely intended, as will be made evident to you by the nature of
my papers, to afford you an insight into my character and a proof of
my moderation. I had the honour of writing to Lord Sidmouth to this
effect, on the spur of the moment, and of pointing out to him, at the
same time, how necessary my presence would be at the examination of my
papers, which are very easily understood by the most trifling
explanation from myself, but which might remain quite unintelligible
in my absence. Lord Sidmouth has not honoured me with a reply.

Your agent, however, my Lord, outstepping the bounds of that decency
and generous feeling which particularly characterize the individuals
of your nation, contrived to add more bitterness to his mission than
could well be imagined. After having offended me once, by grossly
insulting the person whom I venerate above all others in this world,
he heaped upon myself every expression of insult which language
affords, for no other reason than that I would not enter into
conversation with him. He had received your orders to guard me; but
could he suppose that you wished to extend your power so far as to
force me to associate with him? This man had an assistant, of whom I
have no reason to complain, although he took a part in inflicting the
treatment I experienced; I could, however, occasionally remark a
certain reserve in him towards me; and he was besides urged on and
excited by the other.

Your messenger, my Lord, in signifying to me, in the middle of the
night, the order for my removal, left me no other choice than Calais
or Ostend. I had hardly recovered from my surprise, when I had to make
an immediate decision. A few hours afterwards, I asked, upon further
reflection, whether I could not be allowed to go to America, or to
some other part of the Continent. The messenger replied in the
negative, and that he had already written to the Government, to
communicate the choice I had made; I again urged the subject, but he
assured me he was persuaded that all my endeavours would be vain.
Could his assertion be true, my Lord? I have difficulty in believing
it; nevertheless it determined my fate.

I have seen, but have not been allowed to hold in my hands, the order
of His Royal Highness the Prince Regent, which commands me instantly
to quit England. Was this refusal a mere matter of form? Was it a
precaution taken? Would this royal act involve any responsibility, or
was it feared that I might pride myself upon it? And, in fact, could
it be otherwise, when, without laying any crime to my charge, it
seemed only to punish an act of the most rare devotedness, that of a
servant sacrificing himself with his master when fortune had deserted
him.

My Lord, when your Lordship limited my choice, I selected Ostend in
preference to Calais, from pure motives of delicacy suggested to me by
tender love of my country; it would have been too painful to me that
my countrymen should ever be accused of having persecuted me for a
virtuous action. This conduct on their part might perhaps, however,
have been at least excusable; on yours, my Lord, my removal from
England proceeded from a mere caprice, a severity that nothing can
palliate.

I am now, however, upon the Continent, where I have been thrown by you
against my will. Allow me, my Lord, to pause here for a moment. I know
every circumstance of my life; and happily there is not a corner in
Europe where I may not tread with an easy heart, an open countenance,
and a firm step. But you, my Lord, who neither have the leisure, nor
the will, nor the means of inquiring into my obscure career, if by
chance I had been brought into danger through the effects of political
dissensions, during the existence of which, all actions that are
proscribed are not therefore crimes, if I had fallen a sacrifice, I
should have been called a victim; but you, my Lord, who would have
delivered me up, what name might not have been given to you? Were you
not exposing yourself to have it said of you, ‘Whilst the English
legislature prides itself upon having abolished the trade of black
slaves in the islands of America, the British Ministers are trading in
white flesh on the continent of Europe!’

My Lord, in consequence of the impulse which your Lordship has given
to my destinies, I have been seized and conducted across the kingdom
of the Netherlands like a malefactor; and, though in a dying state,
have been treated without mercy. I have loudly complained of this
conduct. On this subject, my Lord, shall I venture to repeat to you
some unpleasant truths that were told me? But why not? All your
countrymen have a right to tell the truth fearlessly to a British
Minister, and this is much more incumbent upon a foreigner who has
such just motives of complaint and sorrow. Well then, my Lord, when I
complained of so revolting an abuse of power against me, I was asked
from what part of the world I came, and whence proceeded my
astonishment? Some persons said to me, ‘We have a good King; do not
find fault with him; he is only the instrument that strikes you; the
tyrannical hand that wields it is farther off.’ Others added, ‘The
English nation had settlements in India a long time since for the
benefit of its commerce, and the English Ministers are now
establishing some upon the Continent to favour their despotism. When
their authority is eluded in England, they protract it upon the
Continent. They have placed amongst us their instruments of torture
and their executioners, and you will neither escape from their
inquisition, nor from the punishments it inflicts.’ Then followed a
volley of animadversions and imprecations against England and
Englishmen. No doubt, my Lord, that people who are wise, well
informed, and free from passions, are not mistaken on this subject,
and know with whom alone the blame rests. They can very well
distinguish the excellence of the laws from their violation, and from
the abuse of power; they know that true Englishmen abhor and detest
all species of tyranny, whether at home or abroad; that in their
island they are the most ardent defenders, the most zealous guardians,
of the great and noble truths which upon our Continent are the objects
of our hopes and of our wishes. But the majority of the people do not
consider the question so closely; they find it the shortest way to
attack a whole nation, and to involve it in one general condemnation.

But, my Lord, what is, after all, my crime? I demand what can be the
motive of so cruel a persecution? and the countries in which that
persecution has been continued by the impulse which you have given,
unite with me in demanding it. Every where the authorities, who have
exercised their jurisdiction over my person, have carefully avoided
seeing me. The rights which I possessed would have embarrassed them,
and they could not have assigned any motive for their acts. They are
ignorant of the origin and of the cause of them. From the Cape of Good
Hope to the place where I now am, whenever I have asked what sentence
had been pronounced, what charge had been preferred against me, I have
been answered by the production of an order; and when I have required
a motive to be assigned, I have received no answer at all.

My Lord, I had the honour of addressing to you from the Cape the
following observations, which I now repeat:—What rational objection
can be raised against the wish which I expressed to inhabit your
country, and to reside among you? Was it feared that I should converse
and write upon political subjects? But if I had, what inconvenience
could result therefrom to England? Was it feared that I should publish
unwelcome complaints respecting your administration? But is there a
spot on the Continent where I am forbidden to give vent to those
complaints, and where I should not find every body disposed to listen
to them? Placed on your own territory, and within your reach, was not
that the situation in which you would have had the surest hold upon
me, and the greatest authority over me? If I became guilty, had you
not your general laws? If I became obnoxious, had you not your private
laws; and, moreover, your _Alien Bill_? Lastly, and above all, you
had, as a pledge of my reserve and moderation, my wish to remain near
you. That wish was great, my Lord, and I will tell you why. My
residence in England would have enabled me to fulfil the hopes and the
destiny of my life, by devoting myself for ever to procure
(consistently with your regulations, and through the legal channel
allowed by you) some consolations and comforts for him for whom I
mourn. I suppose, my Lord, that you and your colleagues have a
sufficient degree of elevation of mind to fulfil, on this occasion, a
political duty, and at the same time, to remain strangers to all
motives of personal animosity. Having secured the safe custody of the
captive, you cannot grudge the enjoyment of any indulgence that is not
a burden to you; you will, on the contrary, facilitate the means of
his obtaining them. I implore, therefore, to be allowed to undertake
the sacred duty of bestowing them; my heart feels the want of
fulfilling it: I will do it in good faith. I should have convinced
you, my Lord, had I been able to see you, and I do not despair yet; I
still solicit again....

I had also considered, my Lord, I must confess, that another chance of
my admission existed in the wish which your Lordship must have felt to
take advantage of so favourable an opportunity to learn the truth. I
thought that both your situation and your character would prompt you
to do so. And what conflicting evidence would you not thus have
obtained to direct you in your noble functions as jury! I should have
replied to all your questions with candour and without passion; I
should have convinced you quietly, if you had wished it, of all the
errors in which the multiplicity and importance of your affairs compel
you to remain with respect to us. I have read in three different
papers, the Times, the New Times, and the London Chronicle, your
answer to Lord Holland, on his motion relative to St. Helena; and I
can assure you that almost every line of it is founded on error.

God forbid, my Lord, that I should suspect that you do not believe
yourself what you state! But your information has been erroneous. Your
Lordship has affirmed, for instance, that none of the relations of the
Emperor Napoleon had written to him; whereas I myself delivered to him
three or four letters, sent by you through Sir Hudson Lowe, from
Madame Mère, from the Princess Borghese, and from his brother Lucien.
The fact in itself, my Lord, is unimportant; but the want of accuracy
on this point must excite your doubts upon others, and corroborate, in
some degree, my assertions upon the remainder. Again, that part of
your speech concerning myself is so garbled that, notwithstanding the
unfavourable prejudice which I have a right to entertain against Sir
Hudson Lowe, I am persuaded that he will himself exclaim against the
incorrectness of the statement. Be that as it may, my Lord, in the
heat of opposition, and of conflicting parties, two _true conclusions_
are invariably drawn from the same fact, and my conclusion cannot
possibly be precisely yours. The public are aware of this, and would
therefore have wished to establish theirs upon official documents. But
you have thought proper to refuse to produce these documents; will you
not have thereby fixed public opinion?

My Lord, it is time to sum up, after so long a statement.

1.—I demand justice and redress for the abuse of power, the arbitrary
and tyrannic act, by which Lord Charles Somerset deprived me of my
liberty during so long a period, and in direct violation of the laws
of his country.

2.—I demand justice and redress for the irregular forms with which all
my papers have been seized in the Thames, without an inventory having
been made of them, notwithstanding all my remonstrances.

3.—I demand justice and redress for having been sent to the Continent
as a captive, in open violation of all principles, and, in consequence
of an impulse given, or instructions transmitted, obliged to pass
through the Netherlands and adjacent countries as a malefactor.

4.—I demand the examination and prompt restitution of my papers seized
in the Thames. Most of them had been respected by Sir Hudson Lowe, and
others are absolutely necessary to me in the daily occurrences of my
domestic affairs; they contain all my titles of property and fortune;
without them I am deprived of every thing.

5.—I demand the restitution of my papers of St. Helena, the inventory
of which, duly certified and signed by Sir Hudson Lowe, is amongst the
papers that have been seized in the Thames. My papers of St. Helena
consist almost solely of a manuscript, in which are recorded, day by
day, during eighteen months, but as yet confusedly, and without being
settled, the conversations, the words, and perhaps even the gestures,
of him who so long guided the destinies of Europe.

This manuscript, sacred by its nature and its object, was unknown, and
was intended to remain unknown to all. I allowed Sir Hudson Lowe to
peruse it sufficiently to be convinced of its inoffensive nature in
political matters. On arriving at the Cape, I had the honour to write
to the Prince Regent, through the channel of Ministers, as well as to
Ministers themselves, to place these precious materials under their
special protection; I appealed to them in the name of justice and of
history. They are, according to all laws, my sacred property, the
property of my children, and of posterity.

6.—Lastly, and above all, I demand the restoration of the letter which
the Emperor Napoleon did me the honour to address to me in my prison,
in the Island of St. Helena. A letter entirely foreign to politics,
read by the Governor of St. Helena, read by Ministers themselves, if
they have thought proper to do so, cannot, consistently with any code
of laws, be taken from the person whose property it is, however strong
it may be in the tenor of its confidential expressions. This sacred
and precious object is the reward of my life, a title for my children,
a monument for my family.

My Lord, as I am by nature and reflection a friend to propriety and
moderation, it is to you that I first address the enumeration of my
grievances. It is of you alone that I quietly ask their redress.[34]
But if your Lordship should not think proper to reply, it is then to
your tribunal that I shall feel compelled to appeal; after that to the
tribunal of public opinion; and lastly, and above all, to that dread
tribunal, which, holding the balance with an equal hand between
tyrants and victims, secures in eternity the infallible triumph of all
rights and the final chastisement of all injustice.

                              “I have the honour to be,” &c.

Footnote 34:

  This letter was only made public a year after it had been written;
  the motive which led to its publication has already been seen, and
  will be further explained in the sequel of these pages.

It was about this time that my petition to the British Parliament also
appeared. I had forwarded it from the deserts of Tygerberg to London:
but, whether it did not reach its address, or whether obstacles
occurred to its being brought forward, not a word had been said about
it. My return brought the circumstance to light. A member of the House
of Commons, struck with the sensation which its publication had just
caused, offered to present it himself; and for that purpose a paper
was sent to me from England, to which I affixed my signature. But this
formality was not sufficient; and this circumstance, added perhaps to
other considerations, prevented its being laid before the House. I
transcribe it here. It is so nearly allied to my subject that I trust
I shall be forgiven for so doing. Besides, that document and others
which are found in this volume have been mutilated, disfigured, and
re-translated into French from a foreign text: I am therefore
interested in their being restored in all their integrity. Besides, if
they were not found here they might be considered as apocryphal, and
that is what I wish to avoid.

                 PETITION TO THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND.

A simple individual, a helpless stranger, presumes to raise his voice
among you, Representatives of the people of England; but he invokes
you in the name of humanity, of justice,—in the name of your glory.
Can he speak in vain? must he not be heard? Cast out from St. Helena,
forced away from the greatest monument of the vicissitudes of human
life that ever existed, I approach you to paint to you his situation,
his sufferings. Snatched suddenly and unexpectedly from his presence,
deprived of all communication, my words, my ideas, will be all my own:
they will have no other source but my heart. Perhaps the lofty spirit
of him who is the object of them will be irritated by the step which I
am taking at this moment; thinking that here below he ought not, he
cannot, appeal from his sufferings, _but to God alone_. Perhaps he
will demand of me who has committed the cares and the interests of his
life to me? It matters not: my love for him will have caused my
weakness. I feel myself already too far from his heroic influence; my
heart can no longer contain the ills of which it has been the witness.
They open for themselves a passage; they force me to cry out.

You have banished in the deserts of the ocean him whose magnanimous
confidence brought him, _freely and from choice_, to live among you,
under the protection of your laws, which he considered all-powerful.
No doubt you sought in your determination only what you conceived to
be useful; you did not pretend to be just; otherwise it might be
demanded of you, who put him in your power? who gave you the right of
judging him? upon what ground have you condemned him? whom have you
heard in his defence?... But you have made the law.... It exists; I
respect it. I am not entitled to discuss the principle. I will refrain
from all murmur; my protest shall not escape from my heart. You shall
hear now only the vexations with which your decisions have been
attended, and, no doubt, contrary to your intentions. Representatives
of Great Britain, you have said you only wished to secure the person
of the Emperor Napoleon, and to ensure his detention.—This object
attained, you proposed that every thing should be lavished upon him
that could soften and alleviate what you have considered the work, the
obligation of policy:—such have been the spirit, the letter of your
laws, the expression of your debates, the wishes of your nation, the
sentiments of its honour. Well, then! only the severe part of your
intentions has reached the illustrious captive upon his frightful
rock. Happy, however, still, if they never had been transgressed. But
the clouds which hang over his island are less dense, less dark, than
the moral and physical pains which are heaped upon his head.

Under the vain pretence of apprehensions purely imaginary, every day
has seen new restrictions. His proud spirit has every day brooked new
outrages; all exercise has become impossible to him; all visits, all
conversations, have been nearly interdicted. Thus privations of every
kind, vexations of every nature, unite against him with the extreme
insalubrity of a climate, at once humid and burning, with the dull
monotony of a sky without colours or seasons. They contract every
instant, in a frightful manner, the circle of his life! He is
compelled to keep his chamber. They are inflicting on him his death!

Did you then intend all these things? No, undoubtedly; and what
motives could justify them? The fear of an escape? Then let them call
together military and naval men, competent judges, that they may
consult their experience, that they may learn their opinions, and let
them cease to surrender such an object to the discretion of a single
man, who, taking his terrors for his guide, will occupy his time every
day with combating phantoms which his own terrified imagination may
create, without reflecting that he cannot destroy all chances, or
reach them all, but by causing death. At Longwood all escape is held
impossible; no one there thinks of it. Certainly, every one would wish
to accomplish the enterprise at the expense of his life: death would
appear sweet for so glorious a result. But how elude the officers who
are constantly on the watch? escape the soldiers who line the shore?
descend perpendicular rocks? throw one’s self, as it were, into the
vast ocean? clear a first line of boats? a second of ships of war?
when one is overlooked from all the heights, where one may be
surrounded, pursued with signals every instant, and in all directions?
And what mode of embarkation could be hazarded? There is none within
reach of the shore. In what vessel could refuge be sought? There is
not one far or near; all foreign sail, even those of your own nation,
become the prey of your cruisers, if they approach without urgent
motives the accursed isle!

With such precautions and under such circumstances, is not then the
whole island a prison sufficiently secure? Can it be necessary to fill
it incessantly with prisons within prisons? And if so many
difficulties could be overcome, which is impossible, the immensity of
the seas and almost every land remain still a new prison?

Now who would induce men in their sound senses to dream of such
ridiculous attempts? Who at Longwood could entertain thoughts so madly
desperate? Besides, the Emperor Napoleon has still the same views, the
same desires, which he declared when he came with confidence _freely
and in good faith_ among you: ‘A retreat and repose under the
protection of your positive laws, or those of America.’ This is what
he wished, this is what he wishes still, what he always demands.

If then the island of St. Helena, from its nature, is not already a
sufficient prison—if it has not the advantage of combining safety with
indulgence, you have been deceived in your choice and your intentions.
For what purpose send us to die miserably in a foreign climate? For
what purpose all your additional expenses? For what purpose your
numerous garrison and its large staff? For what purpose your naval
establishment? For what purpose the restrictions imposed upon the
commerce of that unfortunate isle? There were many points in your
European dominions where you could have kept us without expense, and
where we should have considered ourselves less unfortunate! If that
island, on the contrary, from its nature, and with the aid of the
precautions above stated, presented in itself every thing that human
wisdom and prudence can conceive necessary, then would not all
aggravating conditions be so many useless vexations, tyrannical and
barbarous acts executed against your intention? For it was not your
intention to torture Napoleon—to make him die by inches; and yet it is
but too true that he is perishing from the incessant wounds of every
day, of every hour, of every minute.

If you chose to behold in him a simple prisoner, and not the object of
the ostracism of kings, a king himself—if you have designed to give
him only a common prison, and not to choose for him a place where the
asperities of his exile might be mitigated—if it was intended to
commit him to a gaoler, and not to an officer of high rank, who, by
his habits of business and of the world, would know how to unite what
he owed to the safety of the captive with the respect and regard which
he commands—if it was intended to pursue hatred and vengeance, and all
the narrow and vulgar passions—if it was intended only, in fine, to
intrust to the climate the death of the illustrious enemy, to charge
nature with an act which no one durst execute himself—if all this was
intended, I stop; I leave nothing more to say; I have already said too
much.

But if, in the spirit of your Bill itself, you meant to accompany your
political act, as you in fact did, with all the intentions of a great,
noble, and honourable nation, I may continue: for you must have meant
all the good that circumstances can permit; interdicted every ill that
necessity did not command. You never meant that the prisoner should be
deprived of all exercise, by the needless imposition of conditions or
forms which would make that recreation a torment.

You have not wished that the nature of his words, the length of his
sentences, should be prescribed to him, you have not wished that his
original circuit should be abridged upon the pretence that he did not
make daily use of its extent; you have not wished that he should be
forced to confine himself to his chamber, that he might not find
himself in the midst of intrenchments and palisades, with which his
garden is ridiculously surrounded.

Now, all these things exist; they are renewed every day, although they
are considered useless, and although a great many of your countrymen
condemn and lament them.—You did not wish that, to the great detriment
of his health and his comforts, he should be condemned to a wretched,
small, inconvenient dwelling: while the government had large and fine
houses both in town and country, which would have been much more
commodious and more appropriate, and would have saved the sending of
the famous palace, or to speak much more correctly, of the immense
quantity of rough planks, now rotting unused upon the shore, because
it has been found that it would require from seven to eight years to
complete the intended edifice. You cannot have meant that, in spite of
the sums which you have devoted to them, the necessaries of life, all
the means of subsistence, furnished daily at Longwood, should be of
the worst kind, while others could have those of the best quality; you
did not mean that Napoleon should be so far outraged as to attempt to
force him to discuss the little details of his own expenditure, that
he should be called upon to produce a surplus when he had none; that,
in default of his so doing, he should be threatened with insufferable
reductions; that he should be forced to desire, in his indignation,
‘To let him be quiet; that he asked for nothing; that when he should
be hungry he would go and seat himself among those brave fellows whose
tents he perceived at a distance, who would not repulse the oldest
soldier in Europe.’—You did not intend that Napoleon should find
himself thereby constrained to sell his plate piece-meal, to supply
the deficiency of every month, and that he should be reduced to the
necessity of accepting what some faithful servants were happy enough
to be able to lay at his feet.

O Englishmen! Is it thus they can treat in your name, him who has
governed Europe, disposed of so many thrones, created so many kings!
Do you not fear the loud complaint of history? Suppose it should
hereafter say, ‘They deceived him to get possession of his person, and
they afterwards grudged him the means of subsistence.’ Will you suffer
your sentiments, your character, your honour, to be thus compromised?
Is this then your Bill, your intentions? And what connexion have such
unbecoming measures with security? You never intended that authority
should make a puerile and barbarous study of incessantly recalling, by
words, regulations, and acts, that which it would have been delicate
never to mention; by repeating to us every day that we deceived
ourselves strangely respecting our position; by rigidly interdicting
all unusual respect; in even punishing, as we have been told, those
whose habits had inadvertently led them to shew such respect; by
restricting the journals furnished us to those which might be the most
disagreeable; by voluntarily procuring us libels; and by removing or
withholding, on the contrary, favourable works; in fine, by imposing
upon us the literal form of the declaration by which we were to
purchase the slavery and the happiness of attending a revered object;
by compelling us to admit into it denominations contrary to our habits
and to our laws, thus taking advantage of our own hands to degrade the
august object whom we surrounded; and yet we were obliged to do it,
because, upon our unanimous refusal, we were threatened with being all
torn from our pleasing employment, instantly thrown on board ship, and
carried to the Cape of Good Hope.—How can these cruel and tyrannical
measures contribute to security?

It will be hardly believed that Napoleon, on inquiring if he might be
allowed to write to the Prince Regent, was answered by authority that
his letter would not be suffered to pass, unless it was open; or that
it would be opened to ascertain its contents: a proceeding which
reason rejects, as equally insulting to the two august persons.

St. Helena had been chosen for us, we were told, in order that we
might be able to enjoy there a certain degree of liberty and some
indulgence.—But we cannot speak to any one; we are forbidden to write
to any one whomsoever; we are restricted in our most petty domestic
affairs. Ditches and intrenchments surround our dwellings; an
authority without control governs us. And St. Helena was chosen in
order to allow us some indulgence! But what prison in England, then,
could have been worse for us? Certainly, there is none there at this
day that would not seem to us a blessing. We should find ourselves in
a Christian land; we should breathe European air. The control of a
superior authority would have sheltered us from personal resentments,
from momentary irritation, or even an error in judgment.

It has been insinuated to the officers of your nation that they are
not to present themselves before him whom they guard; or they have
been forbidden to do so. The English themselves, whatever may be the
rank and the confidence which they enjoy, have been forbidden to
approach us, and to enter into conversation with us, without
formalities which are equivalent to an interdiction, lest we might
represent to them the ill usage heaped upon us—a precaution useless
with respect to security; but which proves the jealous care with which
we are prevented from communicating the truth. Our efforts on this
subject have been made a crime; as if to inform you of the truth,
particularly where it interests your honour, your character, was not
doing you a service.

You certainly never intended to allow such a tyranny over our thoughts
and sentiments, as to insinuate to us, or inform us, that, if we
continued to express ourselves freely in our letters to our relatives,
to our friends, we should be torn from the presence of Napoleon, and
banished from the Island. Yet it is precisely this circumstance which
has brought about my deportation, by causing me to forward,
clandestinely, the very letters which I had in the first instance,
intended for the Governor, and which I would have sent to him, had it
not been for his vexatious intimation—an intimation gratuitously
tyrannical—since these letters were sent open to Ministers,
accompanied, if necessary, by the notes of the local authority, that
they might be detained by the Ministers, if they were improper; or
even delivered up to the laws, if they were criminal: and since, at
all events, they must have in their eyes the merit of being a further
means of coming at the truth.

Certainly, you never intended that those who had obtained the favour
of staying with Napoleon should find themselves within the penalties
of the laws, but excluded from their benefit. This is, however, what
has been positively signified to us. You did not intend that my most
secret, and most sacred, papers should be seized; and, though I had
allowed them to be read cursorily, in order to shew their nature, that
they should be taken from me, and that I should not be allowed to put
my seal upon them. You never intended that a barbarous sport should be
made in my case, of whatever is most holy and most sacred among you;
that, in contempt of my constant claims to be restored to liberty, or
brought to trial; that, in despite of my reiterated offers to submit
myself voluntarily, beforehand, to all the privations, even arbitrary,
which might be imposed upon me in England, I should be kept prisoner
at St. Helena; that I should be sent from that Island to the Cape of
Good Hope, to be brought back in the course of time, from the Cape to
St. Helena; that I should be carried a prisoner over the vast extent
of sea, in a frail vessel, to the great injury of the health of my
son, whose life was in danger, to the peril of my own life, which has
been afflicted with infirmities that must accompany me to the
grave,—if, indeed, they do not plunge me into it before my time.

It was not your intention that, on my arrival at the Cape, the
Governor should detain me there arbitrarily, without examination,
without inquiry, without inquest, and cause me to wither there in the
pangs of sorrow, of delay, and of despair, upon the ridiculous
pretence of sending to a distance of two thousand leagues to inquire
of my natural judges, the ministers to whom I so earnestly solicited
to be delivered up, if it would be right to send me to them; and
executing beforehand upon me, by that single act, a sentence a
thousand times more terrible than could have been that of my judges,
viz. depriving me for several months of my liberty, detaining me the
whole of that time a captive at the extremity of the earth, separated
from my family, from my friends, from my interests, painfully wearing
out in the desert the few days which remain to me. Surely, under the
empire of positive laws, no one could thus tyrannically sport with the
liberty, the life, the happiness of individuals.

O Englishmen! if such acts should remain unpunished, your excellent
laws would be no more than an empty name. You would carry terror to
the extremities of the earth and there would no longer be either
liberty or justice among you.

Such are the grievances which I had to make known to you, and which
are developed, with others, in a letter hereto annexed,[35] which, on
leaving St. Helena, I sent to the Governor, in the hope that it might
produce a reformation.

Footnote 35:

  The Statement of the Grievances of Longwood, addressed to Sir Hudson
  Lowe.

Many of these grievances would perhaps have deserved to pass unnoticed
by us; nevertheless, I have done myself the violence of laying them
before you. There are none of them so trivial as not to interest your
honour. And what could be the causes of such measures? Whence can
proceed these gradual attacks, these continued aggravations. How can
they have been justified? We know not.

Not, however, that the ruling power at St. Helena denies the danger to
the health of the captive, the imminent peril of his life, the
probable and speedy issue of such a state of things. ‘It will have
been his own wish,’ they content themselves with coldly observing; ‘It
will be his own fault.’ But do they act discreetly in this? To confess
that Napoleon seeks death, is it not confessing that they have
rendered life intolerable to him? ‘Moreover,’ continue they, ‘why
refuse to take the necessary exercise, because an officer must
accompany him? What is there in this formality so hateful, so painful?
Why does he insist upon making it a matter of such great importance?’
But who can arrogate to himself the right of judging of the feelings
of the illustrious victim? Napoleon debars himself, and he is silent;
what would they have more? Besides, it has been reported, a thousand
times, it is neither the colour of the coat nor the difference of
nation which creates repugnance; but the nature of the thing itself,
and its inevitable effects. If, in such exercise, the benefit of the
body were greatly below the sufferings of the mind, would this
exercise be an advantage?

But it is further insinuated, (for there is not one identical scale
for all minds and all sentiments) ‘Why such particular regard, why
such extraordinary cares and attentions? After all he is a captive, of
distinction perhaps, but what is he more? what are his claims?’

What he is, and what are his claims, I will proceed to state.

Napoleon’s destiny has been the first, the most astonishing in
history. He is the man of renown, of prodigies; the hero of ages. His
name is in every mouth; his actions excite every imagination; his
career remains without a parallel. When Cæsar meditated the seizure of
the sovereign power in his country, Cæsar was already the first man in
it, by his birth and his riches; when Alexander undertook to subjugate
Asia, Alexander was a king, and the son of a king who had paved the
way for his successes: but Napoleon, rushing from the crowd to govern
the world, presents himself alone without any other auxiliary than his
genius. His first steps in his career are so many miracles; he
immediately covers himself with immortal laurels, and reigns from that
instant over every mind: the idol of his soldiers, whose glory he has
raised to the skies—the hope of his country, which, in her pangs
already feels that he will be her liberator; and this expectation is
not disappointed. At her expiring voice, Napoleon, interrupting his
mysterious destinies, hastens from the banks of the Nile; traverses
the seas, at the risk of his liberty and of his reputation; and lands
alone upon the French shore. Every heart leaps at seeing him again.
Acclamations, public rejoicing, and triumph attend him into the
capital. At sight of him the different factions droop, parties blend
themselves into one; he rules, and the revolution is chained.

The mere weight of opinion, the influence of one single man, effected
every thing. He had no occasion to fight; not one drop of blood was
shed. Nor was this the only time that such a prodigy distinguished his
life.

At his voice, the principles of disorganization vanish; wounds are
closed; stains are effaced. Creation seems once more to issue from
chaos.

All the revolutionary follies disappear; grand and noble truths alone
remain. Napoleon knows no party; no prejudice attaches to his
administration. All opinions, all sects, all talents, form themselves
in a group about him; a new order of things commences.

The nation recovers breath, and blesses him; the people of other
states admire him; kings respect him; every one is happy,—every one
fells himself once more honoured in being a Frenchman.

Shortly, he is raised to the throne; he becomes Emperor. Every one
knows the rest. Every one knows with what lustre, with what power, he
dignified his crown. A sovereign by the choice of the people,
consecrated by the head of religion, sanctioned by the hand of
victory, what chief of a dynasty ever united titles so powerful, so
noble, so pure? Let them be examined.

All the Sovereigns were allied to him by blood or treaties. All
nations acknowledged him. Englishmen, if you alone are an exception,
that exception only belongs to your policy; it was only a matter of
form. Moreover, you are precisely those who have seen in Napoleon the
most sacred, the most indisputable titles. Other powers may perhaps
have yielded to necessity. You, you have done nothing but submit to
principles, to your conviction, to the truth; for such are your
doctrines that Napoleon, four times elected by a great nation, must
necessarily, in spite of your public denials, have found himself a
sovereign in the bottom of your hearts. Look into your consciences!...
Now, Napoleon has lost nothing but his throne; a reverse has snatched
it from him; success would have fixed it with him for ever. He has
seen eleven hundred thousand men march against him. Their generals,
their sovereigns, have every where proclaimed that his person was
their sole object. What a destiny! He fell; but he lost only power:
all his august attributes remain and command the respect of mankind.

A thousand recollections of glory still crown him; misfortune renders
him sacred, and, in this state of things, the man of real feeling does
not hesitate to consider him more venerable upon his rock than at the
head of six hundred thousand men, imposing laws.

Such are his claims.

In vain would narrow minds, or perfidious hearts, attempt to charge
him, as is the custom, with being the offensive cause of all the
evils, of all the troubles, of which we have been the witnesses or the
victims. The time of libels is past, the truth must have its turn.
Already the clouds of falsehood are clearing up before the sun of
futurity. A time will come when the world will render him complete
justice; for passions die with contemporaries; but actions live with
posterity, which has no bounds. Then it will be said that the great
actions, the great benefits, came from him; that the evils were those
of time and fate.

Who does not now begin to see that, notwithstanding his vast power, he
never had the choice of his destiny or of his means? that, constantly
armed for defence, he retarded his destruction only by a constant
succession of new prodigies; that in this terrible conflict he was
placed under the necessity of subduing every thing, in order to
survive and save the great national cause? Who among you, Englishmen,
dreams of denying, above all, this last truth? Has not _war for life_
been often proclaimed among you; and did not your secret allies, in
the bottom of their hearts, feel that which your position permitted
you to declare aloud? Do you not still boast that you would have
carried on the war as long as he maintained himself? Thus every time
that he proposed peace to you, whether his offers were sincere, or
whether they were not, it was of little importance to you: your
decision was fixed. What course then remained for him, and what
reproach could be uttered against him, which you yourselves did not
already deserve? And who at this day would still pretend to bring
forward the vulgar reproach of his ambition? What then has it had so
new, so extraordinary, and above all, so exclusive in his person?

Did it stifle sentiment in him, when he said to the illustrious Fox,
that in future Europe would be so united by laws, manners, and blood,
that there could be no war in it, but civil war?

Was it irresistible, when, describing to us all his useless efforts to
prevent the rupture of the treaty of Amiens, he concluded that
England, notwithstanding all the advantages of to-day, would, however,
have gained more by having adhered to it; that all Europe would have
gained by it; that he alone, perhaps, his name and his glory, would
have lost by it?

Was it an over-greedy and common ambition, when at Chatillon he
preferred the chance of losing a throne to the certainty of possessing
it at the price of the glory and independence of the nation?

Was it incapable of alteration, when he has been heard to say, ‘I
returned from the Isle of Elba quite another man. They did not think
it possible, and they were wrong. I am not a man to do things with a
bad grace, or by halves. I would have been at once the monarch of the
constitution and of peace?’

Was it insatiable, when, after the victory of which he considered
himself certain at Waterloo, his first word to the vanquished was to
have been the offer of the treaty of Paris, and a sincere and solid
union, which, blending the interests of the two nations, would have
insured the empire of the seas to England, and forced the continent to
repose?

Was it blind, and without motives, when, after his disaster, passing
in review the political consequences which he had so often foreseen,
and trembling at the probabilities of the future, he exclaimed, ‘There
is no nation, not even the English, who may not one day have to lament
their victory at Waterloo?’

And who can now think of reverting to this charge of ambition? It will
not be the people, all astonished as they are, at the conduct of those
who have overthrown him. Will it be the Sovereigns? They talked of
nothing but justice before the battle, but what use have they made of
the victory? Let them cease, then, to repeat these odious charges.
They might be an excellent pretence; they would be pitiful
justifications. Let them content themselves with having conquered!...

But I grow warm. Whither do the force of truth, the warmth of
sentiment, the impulse of the heart, carry me? I return to my subject.

Representatives of Great Britain, take this state of things into fresh
consideration. Justice, humanity, your honour, your glory, demand it
from you. St. Helena is insupportable; Napoleon’s stay there is
equivalent to certain and premeditated death; you could not wish to
make yourselves responsible for this in the eyes of futurity. Napoleon
was, during twenty years, your terrible enemy; he will remind you of
_Hannibal_ and _of Roman infamy_.... You would not stain with such a
spot the noble pages of your present history. Save your administration
the odious, the horrible, censure of having trafficked with the blood
of a prisoner. History furnishes several examples of it. They all
excite our horror; and what an increase of dignity would be reserved
for Napoleon’s character! For it is easy to predict, when Napoleon
shall be no more, when the crime has been accomplished, he will become
the man of the people; then he will be only the victim, the martyr, of
Kings. The inevitable march of the force of things and of the
sentiments of man so wills it. Save our modern annals from such a
scandal and its dangerous consequences. Save royalty from its own
blindness. Save the most sacred interests of the great Monarchs, in
whose name the victim is under execution. Save royal Majesty in the
first of its attributes, the most holy of its characters, its
_inviolability_. If kings themselves lay their hands upon the
representatives of God on earth, what restraint, what respect, can
they intend to oppose to the attempts of the people? There is no
prosperity here below, secure from time or from fortune. The circle of
vicissitudes envelops all thrones. This cause is the cause of all
kings, present and to come. An anointed of the Lord degraded, debased,
tortured, immolated, cannot, must not, be other than an object of
indignation, of horror for history, of terror for kings!

Recal Napoleon among you; let him come to find repose under the
protection of your laws; that they may enjoy his distinguished homage.
Do not deprive them of their noblest triumph. And who will prevent
you?

Will it be your first decision? But, in recalling it, you would shew
to every eye that you were only then guided by the force of
circumstances, the law of necessity.

Will it be your domestic repose? But the thought of that would be
foolish; the doubt an injury, an outrage, to your institutions, to
your manners, to your whole population.

Will it be the safety of Europe? But truths of circumstance have their
day, and it belongs only to the vulgar to perpetuate them, to bring
them forward long after they cease to exist. Napoleon, in his
omnipotence, might be the terror of Europe; reduced to his single
person, he can no longer be any thing but an object of astonishment
and meditation. And, in truth, what could he effect at this day, even
with power, against the safety of Russia, that of Austria, of Prussia,
or your own?

Finally, can there be any fear of his secret intentions? But Napoleon
now has no wish but for repose. In his own eyes, in his own mouth, his
wonderful career has already all the distance of ages. He no longer
considers himself of this world; his destinies are accomplished. A
soul of such elevated power is of no value but to lead to celebrity,
to glory. And what mortal has accumulated more of these? Does not the
measure seem above the imagination of man? Have not even his reverses
been abundant sources of glory to him? Does there exist any thing to
be compared with the return from the Isle of Elba? And, more lately,
what an apotheosis is his; the regrets of a great nation. A great
number among you have traversed our provinces, penetrated to our
fire-sides; you know our secrets, our sentiments. If the country was
less dear to him than glory, what has he to desire after what he has
left behind? His advanced age, his lost health, his disgust at the
vicissitudes of life, perhaps that which he feels for men, the
satiety, above all, of the great objects pursued here below, leave him
nothing new or desirable but a tranquil asylum, a happy and sweet
repose. He demands them from you, Englishmen, and you owe them to the
heroic magnanimity with which he gave you the preference over all his
other enemies. Learn, dare, will to be just. Recal him, and you will
have secured the only glory which seems to be wanting in your present
condition. The admirers, the real friends, of your liberties and of
your laws expect this of you; they demand it. You have baffled those
who delight in boasting of all the benefits that flow from your noble
constitution.

‘Where, then,’ say their adversaries, with a triumphant irony, ‘is
that generosity, that elevation of sentiment, that inflexibility of
principle, that public morality, that force of opinion, which you told
us distinguished that free people, in some sort superior to the
sovereignty itself? Where are the so much vaunted fruits of this
classic ground of liberal institutions? All this pompous scaffolding,
these imaginary pictures, have then disappeared before the dangers
which a single man has created; or rather before the hatred and the
vengeance which he has inspired. And what more could that absolute
power which we defend, and you decry so much, have done? It would have
done less, perhaps, but most assuredly it would not have been able to
do more. It would have shewn itself sensible, no doubt, of the noble
and magnanimous confidence of its enemy, or, if it had so decided, on
the ground of utility, it would, at least have shewn more energy,
candour, and elevation in its injustice. It would not have descended
to palliate its wrong in the eyes of the people, by associating its
neighbours gratuitously in it. It would have avoided above all the
leaving itself entangled in this distressing dilemma: Either, when you
concluded your iniquitous treaty of ostracism, the victim was not in
your power, and you had the cowardice to hold out the hand to him that
you might seize him; or, you had him already in your power, and you
sacrificed your glory, the honour of your country, the sanctity, the
majesty, of your laws to foreign solicitations.’

Englishmen, your friends are obliged to turn to you for an answer.
They await it.

As for me, in spite of a fatal experience of two years, such is still
my confidence in your principles, that I still reckon upon your
justice; and I have dared to speak before you, consulting only my own
heart, persuaded that it will be in the midst of you that I shall see
the defence and the talents worthy of this great and noble cause
arise. However you may decide in other respects, my own destinies are
fixed. Wherever the victim dwells I wish to go, to devote at his feet
the few days that still remain to me;[36] and in this tribute of
sentiment I shall think I have done nothing but for myself. When I
followed him at first, I rather obeyed honour, I followed glory:—but
now I bewail, far from him, all the qualities of the heart that attach
man to man. How many of your countrymen have approached him! they
would all tell you the same thing. Let them be consulted. Englishmen!
is this,

Footnote 36:

  All solicitations in this respect with the English Ministry have
  proved vain. This demand, frequently repeated, remains without an
  answer, or has produced only a refusal; as may be particularly seen
  in one of the letters in this collection.

then, the man who has been portrayed to you? Have you pronounced upon
his fate in full possession of the case?

                                                   COUNT DE LAS CASES.

My solicitations were not confined to the letters which I addressed to
the Allied Sovereigns; my efforts were ardently directed towards every
point, and every object I could think of. As soon as I was restored to
liberty, I found myself surrounded by the French exiles at Frankfort,
who shared my sentiments, and manifested the tenderest sympathy for
me. All, not even excepting those who had nothing to spare, save the
widow’s mite, offered me all they possessed, not only to provide for
the personal wants with which they supposed I had to struggle, but
also to promote the sacred object which wholly occupied my mind. At
Frankfort I had also the happiness to meet the Countess de
Survilliers, whose extreme generosity is only one of the many virtues
that adorn her. Finally, some eminent merchants of Frankfort, merely
from hearing of my adventures, and from motives of pure sympathy, made
me the most generous offers; and even diplomatic individuals, of whom
there were many at that time in the town, indirectly conveyed to me
proofs of their attention. These circumstances enabled me to learn
where the different members of the Emperor’s family were to be found,
and to enter immediately into communication with them, so as to adopt
the speediest means of ameliorating the condition of him for whose
sake I had resolved to exert every effort, and even to sacrifice my
life.

On the other hand, I had laid down the rule of writing regularly, on a
certain day every month, to the Grand Marshal, in order to obtain such
information as would enable me to render myself as useful as possible;
and I sent the letter open to the Under Secretary of State for the
Colonies, with whom I had, by this means, commenced a correspondence,
which I conceived to be best calculated to fulfil the object I had in
view. I requested that he would send out regularly to Longwood the
newspapers, pamphlets, new publications, and various articles of daily
use which I specified, or which I begged he would himself select, to
be paid for by me to his order; this he promised to do.

The Emperor’s mother, brothers, sisters, and all his relations, though
I was not particularly acquainted with any of them, except Prince
Lucien, immediately answered me in the warmest and most affecting
manner. Mine were almost the first authentic tidings they had received
from the illustrious victim; and they esteemed themselves happy in
finding a channel, by means of which they could transmit to him
testimonies of their respect, devotedness, and affection. They wished
only to be informed what they had to do. An annual contribution of one
hundred and fifty thousand francs was immediately determined on: this
sum I conceived to be indispensably necessary for the establishment at
Longwood. The amount was divided equally among all, and I already had
in my hands the subscriptions of several of the parties, when I had
the satisfaction of being enabled to return them, with the request
that they might be reserved till a future time, as unforeseen
circumstances would render it unnecessary to make use of the money for
two or three years. The reason was that there had been found a deposit
of several hundred thousand francs belonging to the Emperor, and I
esteemed myself happy in being thus early enabled to present to the
members of his family a proof of the regularity and reserve with which
I acted. But unfortunately I was too precipitate; for the money which
had been promised, and was to have been furnished by me, was, either
through the mistake or embarrassments of the banker, or the negligence
of agents, more than a year in being paid. I was very much vexed and
disappointed by this circumstance, for the thirteen bills which I had
left with the Grand Marshal on my departure from St. Helena, had been
quickly paid away, and fresh drafts had been made on my banker, or on
other individuals in London, who allowed the bills to be protested,
because they had no funds belonging to me, or had received none from
any other individual. This occasioned enormous expense, compromised
Longwood, and afforded a subject of ridicule to the English
ministerial journals.

As soon as I was made acquainted with this unfortunate circumstance, I
wrote to London, to offer my personal security for any drafts that
might come from Longwood, stating that they should be payable to order
at Frankfort. To this object I appropriated, in the most advantageous
way I could, the sum which I received from Madame Mère, and which was
the only one that had not been returned, together with some money
which a few friends had lodged in my hands when my own was exhausted;
for my four thousand louis had been repaid to me in a way so singular
that I cannot refrain from mentioning it. A person who stood in a very
delicate situation, and who held money belonging to the Emperor,
suspecting, though he knew nothing of me, that I might be in some
degree of embarrasment, transmitted to me a hundred thousand francs. I
could lay no claim whatever to the sum: but this the person in
question doubtless conceived to be his most prudent course,
considering the peculiarity of his situation. Thus I found myself
repaid without having made any claim or given any receipt, and I am
not aware that there existed any trace of the debt due by the Emperor
in any account whatever.

Six months had already elapsed; the fine weather was set in; and my
health, which had been so greatly impaired by disappointment and
vexation, required me to make trial of the waters of Baden. But was I
free to depart? The times were so extraordinary, and such a total
disregard seemed to be every where manifested for the privileges and
the destiny of a Frenchman, that many persons about me very much
doubted whether I should be at liberty; and I was myself not without
apprehension, so accustomed was I to see all justice violated in my
person. Be this as it may, I was so desirous to act with perfect
openness, and to evince my gratitude for the kindness of Baron
Wessemberg, that I determined to acquaint him with my intention of
departing, and to ask him whether he considered me under his
inspection. However, the Baron in a moment banished all my scruples
and fears, by replying, with the frankness and courtesy which
characterize him, that, in granting me hospitality, there had been no
idea of making me a prisoner.

I accordingly repaired to Baden, where I had the honour of being
received by the Grand Duke and Duchess, almost secretly it is true,
but with those proofs of interest and attention which I might have
expected from the adopted children of Napoleon.

On taking my leave of the worthy Grand Duke, I requested that he would
permit me to remain in his States, and I determined on fixing my
residence at Manheim. I made choice of this place because, like
Frankfort, it afforded every desirable advantage for the continuance
of my correspondence, while it presented none of the inconveniences of
the latter city, which, from circumstances of a very delicate nature,
I was anxious to avoid.

I seldom went out, and I did not abuse my liberty any more than I had
done in the time of the Prussian Commissioner; but I thought it my
duty to receive every one who came to me. I was perfectly aware that I
should be likely to encounter enemies in the disguise of friends; but
I also knew that there were many persons, of all classes, who
frequently came from a distance for the purpose of seeing me, and who
were guided by sincere sentiment. But could I, for the sake of
avoiding one betrayer, run the risk of wounding many honest hearts,
who, amidst their sorrow and regret, hoped to obtain from me a few
words of satisfaction and consolation? During my stay at Manheim, it
would be difficult to imagine the singular questions that were put to
me, and the hints and insinuations of every kind that were thrown out
to me. One proposed to execute my most secret, hazardous, and remote
commissions; another offered to become my mediator with distinguished
and hostile individuals; and a third assured me that he would go in
disguise to Parma, and deliver all my packets to the Empress Maria
Louisa in person. In short, I know not what plans were suggested to
me. I several times received, from natives of different countries,
proposals for effecting Napoleon’s escape. Some were excited by
enthusiasm, some by speculation, and others were, no doubt, contriving
snares; for the crime of instigation is now boldly and universally
resorted to. Fortunately my guarantee was that I had nothing to
conceal. I possessed no secret, therefore I could only express hopes
and wishes in reply to all I heard; and certainly, in the avowed
situation in which I stood, the reports that might have been made from
my conversation could convey no new information. Accordingly, nothing
of an unpleasant nature occurred. By making choice of Manheim, which
is a retired place, and where I lived as privately as possible, I
obviated most of the inconveniences I had met with at Frankfort, which
was the resort of schemers and intriguers of every kind. I also proved
to those who were interested in observing me that I was a stranger to
all secret designs.

The period fixed for the meeting of the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle
was now approaching; and I formed the highest hopes from this august
assemblage. These hopes were shared by every generous heart; for who
could have imagined that the Sovereigns of Europe would have shewn
themselves insensible to the misery of Napoleon, whom each,
individually, had so long treated as a friend, a brother, or a son;
particularly when they should receive a correct and faithful account
of the situation in which he was placed? I had made every necessary
preparation; being determined that they should be assailed by
entreaties, and surrounded by information. I wrote to Maria Louisa;
and I was charged to present to the Sovereigns a letter from Madame
Mère; all the other relations of the Emperor having undertaken to act
for themselves. I carefully collected for each of the Sovereigns all
the authentic documents existing, and drew up a note on the subject,
enclosed in a letter addressed to _themselves_. I did not even neglect
Lord Castlereagh; to whom I thought it requisite to make the
communication in his quality of representative of the King of England.
I shall insert these documents, hoping that the reader will pardon the
many repetitions that occur in them. They all relate to one and the
same subject; this subject is reduced to its simplest expression; the
circle is limited; and recurrence to the same topic is unavoidable.

                      TO THE EMPRESS MARIA LOUISA.

MADAM,—On my return from the place where your husband is perishing,
what a tale of misery could I not unfold to you! But you are his wife,
the mother of his son; what, then, can I say that will appeal to you
more forcibly than the feelings that must naturally arise in your
heart!

I think it my duty to inform your Majesty that I intend, at the
approaching assemblage of the Allied Sovereigns, to lay at their feet
my humble supplications for a mitigation of the misery and cruel
sufferings which are inflicted in their name, and which cannot be
adequately conceived, except by a servant so devoted as I am, or a
relative so near as yourself.

But, Madam, what can be my claims, when compared with the sacred and
all-powerful rights of your Majesty, which are held in veneration all
over the world!

Deign then, Madam, to exercise those rights; and posterity, history,
which consecrate crowns, will encircle your brow with a diadem as
imperishable as your elevation of character, which subdues, and your
gentle virtues, which delight the heart.[37]

                                                  I am, &c.,

                                                      COUNT LAS CASES.

Footnote 37:

  This letter was put into the post at Vienna. I know not whether it
  ever reached its destination; but most probably it did not.

        MADAME MERE TO THE ALLIED SOVEREIGNS AT AIX-LA-CHAPELLE.

SIRES,—A mother, afflicted beyond all expression, has long cherished
the hope that the meeting of your Imperial and Royal Majesties will
afford some alleviation of her distress.

The prolonged captivity of the Emperor Napoleon gives occasion for
appealing to you. It is impossible but that your magnanimity, your
power, and the recollection of past events, should induce your
Imperial and Royal Majesties to interest yourselves for the
deliverance of a Prince, who has had so great a share in your regard
and even in your friendship.

Would you suffer to perish, in miserable exile, a Sovereign, who,
relying on the magnanimity of his enemy, threw himself into his power?
My son might have demanded an asylum from the Emperor, his
father-in-law; he might have consigned himself to the generosity of
the Emperor Alexander, of whom he was once the friend; he might have
taken refuge with his Prussian Majesty, who, in that case, would, no
doubt, have recollected his old alliance. Should England punish him
for the confidence which he reposed in her?

The Emperor Napoleon is no longer to be feared. He is infirm. And even
if he were in the full enjoyment of health, and had the means which
Providence once placed in his hands, he abhors civil war.

Sires, I am a mother, and my son’s life is dearer to me than my own.
Pardon my grief, which prompts me to take the liberty of addressing
this letter to your Imperial and Royal Majesties.

Do not render unavailing the entreaties of a mother, who thus appeals
against the long series of cruelties that has been exercised towards
her son.

In the name of Him, who is in essence goodness, and of whom your
Imperial and Royal Majesties are the image, I entreat that you will
interest yourselves to put a period to my son’s misery, and to restore
him to liberty. For this I implore God, and I implore you who are his
Lieutenants on earth.

Reasons of state have their limits; and posterity, which gives
immortality, adores, above all things, the generosity of conquerors.

                                         I am, &c.

                                                          MADAME MERE.

This letter remained unanswered. Other steps were taken in favour of
Napoleon, by different members of his family; but they were not made
known in a way sufficiently authentic to authorize my mentioning them
here.

        NOTE ADDRESSED TO THE ALLIED SOVEREIGNS, AT THE CONGRESS
                   OF AIX-LA-CHAPELLE, OCTOBER, 1818.

SIRES,—Royal Majesty has no judges on earth. But since sovereigns
themselves, stripping it of its most sacred attribute, have subjected
it to their tribunal, I come with respectful confidence to appeal to
them in favour of a monarch, whom they long recognised, but who is now
deposed by them, a captive in their name, and presenting to the world
the grandest and most terrible vicissitude that was ever witnessed.
Who shall deem himself secure, if even inviolability be violated?

Faithful to his dignity, superior to misfortune, he looks forward to
death as the only termination of his misery. But I, who have been
unexpectedly torn from the fatal rock where I rendered him every
attention in my power, wish now to devote to him the remainder of a
feeble life, and to endeavour to assuage the misery which I am no
longer permitted to share.

I have taken upon myself the sacred mission in which I am now engaged.
I have been prompted to do so by my tender devotedness to the person
of the Emperor, by my private affection for him who was my Sovereign.

I am here a stranger to every political question. I have no other
impulse, no other guide, than that sacred morality which is alike
respected by kings and subjects. It constitutes my strength, my right,
and my excuse.

Napoleon on his rock is a prey to torments and vexations of every
kind; he is the victim of the ill treatment of men, and the
insalubrity of climate. These facts are now notorious to all, and are
sufficiently proved by authentic documents, transmitted from the place
itself, several of which I now presume to submit to the eyes of your
Majesties.

If the law of war, if the law of nations, have been transgressed for
the peace of the world, as it is said, the law of humanity at least
cannot be extinct.

For the last three years, war has every where been succeeded by peace;
passions are calmed; nations and individuals are reconciled; the
hostility of governments and parties is disarmed; the common law of
nations has resumed its sway; one man alone is excluded from these
benefits. He alone is still without the pale of human law. He is
exiled to a barren rock, exposed to an unhealthy climate, doomed to
the misery of a lingering death, and is the daily victim of hatred and
insult. When will there be an end to this extraordinary persecution?
If he be doomed to live, this extraordinary treatment is too cruel!
And surely it is still more barbarous if he be doomed to die! What is
his crime? By whom has he been tried? By what tribunal? Who are his
judges? Where is their right to pronounce sentence on him? Will it be
said that the only guarantee, the only security, against him, are
imprisonment, chains, and death? Will it be said that his acts, his
promises, and his oaths are not to be trusted? Will his return from
the isle of Elba be mentioned as an instance of his bad faith? But at
Elba he was a Sovereign: engagements had been entered into with him,
and had not been kept! Now, by quitting the continent, he has resigned
all sovereignty, and declared his political career to be at an end.
The case is entirely altered. If the sacrifice of his life can alone
appease hatred, and put a period to alarm, _why not inflict death
openly_? (these are his own words;) _a speedy death, though not more
just, would have been more humane, and less odious; it would be a
favour_. This is what he has himself repeatedly said and written. Who
can deny the justice of the remark?

What sufficient motives can still be maintained in justification of
such intolerable treatment?

Is it wished to punish his past invasions? But the invaded countries
have forgotten their resentment in the triumph of victory, and they
are now silent. Is it wished to make reprisals? But Napoleon was a
conqueror, and did he act thus? What was his conduct at Austerlitz, at
the bivouac of Moravia, at Vienna, at Tilsit, at the conferences of
Dresden? Let him be viewed even in that circumstance in which history
will have most difficulty in defending him. Charles IV. when a captive
in the hands of Napoleon, had his choice of residing either in
Compiegne, Marseilles, or Rome, always maintaining the dignity of a
king. Ferdinand, at Valency, was surrounded by all the attention and
respect he could wish. A prince who disputed the throne with the
Emperor fell into his hands. What use did Napoleon make of his
victory? The immediate release of the prisoner attested his
magnanimity; and history will compare this act with the indignities
that are heaped upon the Emperor.

Is it intended to renew for Napoleon the ostracism of the ancients?
But the ancients, if they banished from among them the talents which
they had reason to fear, did not sacrifice the victim. They did not
transport him to another hemisphere, to a desert rock, and a burning
climate. They did not, at least, render Nature chargeable with a crime
which, in the present case, it would seem, human hands dare not
execute.

Finally, is it feared that even the Emperor’s name would have too
powerful an influence in Europe? May not his enemies defeat their own
ends? Persecution always excites interest, always moves the great mass
of the people, who are invariably generous. If it be wished to create
partizans, it is sufficient to make martyrs! Where, then, is the
necessity for these extraordinary and singular measures? Why thus
violate at once the code of nations, the code of sovereigns, and the
code of private men?

Among civilized nations, fury is disarmed before a fallen enemy, who
is respected even among savages, particularly when he trusts to good
faith.

Why then persist in opposing the demands of humanity, justice,
religion, morality, policy, and all the laws of civilization? Why not
rather yield to the dictates of generosity, glory and true interest?
The examples of kings doomed to misery and death have always been
condemned by history: they are recollected with horror by subjects,
and with dread by sovereigns.

Since my removal from St. Helena, I do not personally know what
changes may have taken place in the treatment of the Emperor Napoleon;
but before my departure it was intolerable, both as regarded his
personal dignity and his moral and physical existence. Have those
modifications at length been made which his servants so long and so
vainly solicited? But the deadly influence of the climate and all the
horrors of the place of banishment cannot be changed. These
circumstances in themselves suffice to poison all the sources of life.
There is no dungeon in Europe that would not be preferable to
Longwood, and there is no human being, whatever might be his vigour of
body and strength of mind, who could, under such circumstances, long
resist the effects of so terrible a prison.

The victim is already seized with a disease that must infallibly, in a
very short time, hurry him to his grave. The faculty have candidly
pronounced this opinion, and, in the anguish of my heart, I presume to
report it to your Majesties, trusting that your humanity and high
wisdom will suggest a remedy.

Surely I cannot be accused of want of respect and devotedness to
sovereignty. The testimonies which my life presents are my guarantee
for now presuming to address your Majesties; as the consciousness of
your interests, dignity, and glory, is the guarantee of my hopes and
wishes.

                                                      COUNT LAS CASES.

        LETTER TO HIS MAJESTY THE EMPEROR OF AUSTRIA, ENCLOSING
          THE ABOVE NOTE. (ADDRESSED TO THE EMPEROR HIMSELF.)

SIRE,—On the 10th of February last, I presumed to lay at your
Majesty’s feet the wishes and entreaties of a faithful servant in
favour of his master.

I hope your Majesty will forgive my perseverance, which may, perhaps,
have the appearance of importunity. I now venture to lay before you
another note, in favour of him who was your brother, and whom you made
your son. I take the liberty of accompanying this note with some
authentic documents.

Sire, my hope and my apology rest on the many excellent virtues for
which your Majesty is distinguished. Europe acknowledges and proclaims
you to be the most sincere, moral, humane, and religious of men; and
yet it is in your name that the tortures of a lingering death are
inflicted on him, to whom you gave the hand of your beloved daughter;
whom your own choice and religion have made your son.

Ah, Sire! tremble lest his blood-stained coat should be presented to
you!... And when the day of eternal judgment shall arrive, when the
Supreme Judge of men and things, pronouncing his terrible decrees,
shall ask, “What have you done with your son? Why did you separate the
husband from the wife? How durst you disunite those who had been
joined and blessed in my name? I might award victory to whom I
pleased; but none could take advantage of that victory to abuse my
holy laws, without incurring my anger—--”

But, Sire, I say no more: perhaps I have already gone too far. I crave
your Majesty’s forgiveness. These are the sentiments by which I am
powerfully excited;—these are the complaints that are wrung from me by
the murder of my master, which has been perpetrating before my eyes.
Sire, on my knees, I implore your interference, to prevent the crime
of homicide. Be not deaf to my entreaties!

                                      I am &c.[38]

                                                      COUNT LAS CASES.

Footnote 38:

  A similar letter was addressed to the Emperor Alexander, and the
  King of Prussia.

          LETTER TO LORD CASTLEREAGH, WITH A COPY OF THE NOTE
                  ADDRESSED TO THE ALLIED SOVEREIGNS.

MY LORD,—I have the honour to present to your Lordship a copy of a
note, which I took the liberty of addressing to the Allied Sovereigns.

I am induced to transmit this note to you, my Lord, on account of my
profound respect for the august individual whom you represent, and the
esteem I entertain for your Lordship’s personal talents.

Whatever may be your opinions, my Lord, respecting this note, perhaps
even your objections to it, I am convinced your Lordship has too much
generosity to condemn, wholly and without reserve, a servant, who is
resolved, until the latest moment of his existence, to exert every
effort for the relief and consolation of his Sovereign.

My Lord, how great has been your influence on the destiny of that
Sovereign! How great may it yet be! Why cannot my voice reach your
Lordship’s ear? In the anguish of my tedious solitude, I have
frequently sought to discover the great motives which might have
dictated your harsh and cruel determination. My mind dwells only on
the interest of your country, the rigorous law of necessity, the
conviction of the character and disposition of him at whom you aim the
blow; and finally, the glory and responsibility of your ministerial
situation. Has your Lordship been able to combine together the whole
of the contradictory circumstances? Have you exhausted every source of
information? How I regret that the impaired state of my health and
faculties does not permit me adequately to express my feelings and
thoughts! They would perhaps make an impression on you, my Lord:
perhaps many facts, that I could relate, would excite your
astonishment and serious consideration.

                      I have the honour to be, &c.

                                                    COUNT LAS CASES.

The period of the meeting of the Congress having arrived, I went to
Frankfort, and happened to reach that place on the very day on which
the Emperor Alexander made his entry. This was no doubt a very
favourable opportunity to solicit the favour of being presented to
that Sovereign; and his well known affability, the facility with which
he grants admission into his presence, and perhaps also the peculiar
circumstances relating to me, were so many encouragements to the hope
of easily obtaining an audience, and I was consequently strongly
advised by every body to attempt it. It was the surest way, they said,
to accomplish the object I had in view, and I was much blamed for
refusing to make the trial. But I had maturely weighed within my own
breast the advantages and disadvantages of such a step, and I was far
from sharing the general opinion as to the probability of its result.
To what, had I said to myself, could such a high favour lead me? Could
I expect to touch the heart of this Sovereign by my eloquence? And if
my words had produced some effect upon him as a man, was not the final
decision to proceed from the concurrence of many others? And was I
certain, in an interview of so little duration, and of so much
embarrassment, to speak with as much method and precision as I could
write? Was it right for me to deliver to him, before the proper time
had arrived, authentic documents, which I intended only for the
Sovereigns assembled, as if it were an ordinary petition? And, if the
Emperor Alexander had happened to express himself in my presence,
respecting the Emperor Napoleon, in terms which I could not but have
contradicted, as it was but too probable that he would express
himself, might it not turn out that I had irritated and indisposed,
instead of conciliating, him? This latter consideration had chiefly
led to my determination not to seek for an audience, which presented
so many objections and offered but a single advantage, and that one
personal to me, viz., the signal favour of seeing the first of
monarchs, and of conversing with him of whom Napoleon had said on his
rock; “If I die here, he will be my heir in Europe.”

Besides, the Emperor Alexander knew that I was at Frankfort. I was
told that he had mentioned it in one of his circles, and I was almost
certain that he had been spoken to about me. The circumstance from
which I obtained this information is singular enough to be mentioned
here. My room at the hotel where I had alighted happened to be next to
that of one of his generals, who possessed his intimate confidence,
and who was admitted into his presence at all times. The second or
third evening after my arrival, the master of the hotel came into my
room to inform me that the General was ready to receive me, and that
he would have much pleasure in granting me the interview which I had
asked for. In the first moment of surprise, my immediate answer was to
bid him go and say it was a mistake; but, suddenly reflecting that
this was, perhaps, a fortunate circumstance, brought about by the
intervention of Providence, I ran after the man who was already
delivering his message, and explained myself from the door of the
apartment, that there was probably some error, since I had not the
honour of asking such a favour; upon which the General ran towards me,
as if to detain me, and dismissing his Aide-de-camp, said to me, with
an air of affability and politeness, that, whether it was through
mistake or not, he should be happy to avail himself of this
opportunity to become acquainted, and have some conversation with me.
And we then had a very long conversation together, and, as it will be
easily believed, wholly relating to St. Helena.

I had only come to Frankfort to deposit, in due form, all my documents
in the respective legations, and that done, I returned immediately to
Manheim, in order to escape from the bustle and from the intrigues of
Frankfort. Several persons came thither and offered to serve me at the
Congress, assuring me that their services might be of very great
importance, and proposing to become very zealous agents in my cause.
For this assistance I should of course have been obliged to pay very
largely, and it has been seen that I had scarcely wherewith to supply
the first wants of him for the uncertain interests of whom large sums
were demanded of me. During the sitting of the Congress, and whilst I
was waiting in the hope of a favourable decision from the Sovereigns,
I was destined to receive, even in my solitude at Manheim, fresh
proofs of the perverseness of Sir Hudson Lowe, and of the ill
treatment which he continued to inflict upon his victims. An
unfortunate gunner of an East Indiaman found me out at Manheim, and
about the same time I received a large packet from General Bertrand.
The history of the gunner and of all the vexations to which he was
exposed from the Governor and his confidents, for having been the
bearer of a bust of young Napoleon, from which he hoped to derive some
advantage, by offering it at Longwood, is detailed at some length in
Mr. O’Meara’s work. This bust, which the Governor had at first
intended to throw into the sea, and the existence of which he
afterwards attempted to conceal by taking possession of it, under
pretence of making a present of it to Napoleon himself, was, however,
at last sent to Longwood, in consequence of the expression of public
indignation; and Count Bertrand sent to the gunner, as well for the
value of the bust as to indemnify him for all the vexations and losses
which it had occasioned him, one of the bills which I left with him at
my departure, amounting to 300_l._ Count Bertrand, on sending the bill
to the gunner, requested him to acknowledge the receipt of it; but the
poor fellow, so far from being enabled to acknowledge the receipt of
the bill, had not even heard of Count Bertrand’s Letter, and had been
obliged to pursue his voyage to India, after having delivered the
bust, with the following verbal information given to him by Sir Hudson
Lowe: “That the people of Longwood had destined some gratuity for him,
and that he would hear of it in the course of time.” On his return
from India, the unfortunate gunner was not allowed to go on shore
during the whole time the ship stayed at St. Helena, and he was merely
told once more that what had been mentioned to him concerning his
interests was at the Admiralty in London. When he reached England, he
at last, upon inquiry, got the bill; and it was the first time he had
heard of it; but upwards of eighteen months had elapsed; the persons
on whom it was drawn no longer had the necessary funds, and he was
obliged to leave London with the melancholy persuasion that he had
lost both his bust and his money. This gunner was an inhabitant of
Dalmatia, and was going through Germany on his return home, by way of
Trieste, when he heard, by the greatest chance in the world, at
Frankfort, that he should find at Manheim the drawer of the bill which
he held; he therefore came to me, and his joy was as lively as his
imprecations against Sir Hudson Lowe were abundant, on receiving that
sum which, as he said, was a little fortune to him, and would render
him happy for the remainder of his life.

The large packet which I received from the Grand Marshal consisted of
a long letter from him, written by order of the Emperor, and of sundry
authentic documents which had arrived out of the regular channel. But,
to my great surprise, the very day when I received that letter, I read
its contents in the Netherland newspapers, as extracted and
re-translated from the English papers. Guessing what had been the
intentions at Longwood, I nevertheless sent an official copy of that
letter to Lord Liverpool, as will be seen presently. I insert here all
those documents, because Count Bertrand’s letter, giving a rather
detailed account of the ill treatment which the Emperor experienced
from the moment I had left him, lays before the reader a further
period of eighteen months of the history of Longwood. Some of these
documents, besides, have postscripts in Napoleon’s own hand-writing,
and are too remarkable to be left unnoticed.

              LETTER OF COUNT LAS CASES TO LORD LIVERPOOL.

MY LORD,—I have this instant received a long letter from Count
Bertrand; and at the same moment, to my great surprise, have seen that
letter printed in the _Vrai Liberal_, of Brussels, re-translated from
the _Morning Chronicle_ of London.

To inform your Lordship how that has happened is beyond my power; but
I can assure you, with great truth, that it is without my
participation, and that I sincerely regret the circumstance. I can
only explain it by supposing that one of your countrymen only
consented to take charge of the packet from Longwood, upon condition
of receiving it open, and being assured that it concerned the honour
of his country; and that, on his arrival in London, he communicated
its contents to the public, and forwarded it to me at the same time.
Things would not have been so, my Lord, if, agreeably to my continued
solicitations, I had obtained permission to reside in England.
Persuaded as I am, and as Count Bertrand seems to suspect, that the
atrocious vexations and the indignities which are daily inflicted upon
Longwood may be unknown to the Administration, it would have been to
you, my Lord, who are at the head of that Administration, and to you
alone, that I should immediately have applied to inform you of such
unheard-of grievances; thus furnishing you with the means, and leaving
to you the merit, of redressing them.

I entreat your Lordship to believe that it would have been only after
I had in vain exhausted every step required by decorum, after I had,
in vain, applied, in the order of their rank, to the different
authorities, that I should have adopted the extreme measure of
addressing myself at last to public opinion, which will only be
appealed to and pronounced in the last instance. I gave a proof of
this disposition, my Lord, when, after eight months of absolute
silence on the part of Lord Bathurst, to the statement which I
addressed to his Lordship of various grievances, of which I had the
honour of asking redress at his hands, and which I should, at least,
have been justified in publishing, I did not however do so, until some
ill-timed observations of one of your Members of the House of Commons
rendered it a matter of positive necessity. I gave a proof of it, my
Lord, at the period of the earnest entreaties which my heart prompted
me to make at Aix-la-Chapelle, when I carefully transmitted to Lord
Castlereagh himself a copy of the solicitations and complaints which I
respectfully laid at the feet of the Allied Sovereigns. Lastly, my
Lord, it is to give, as much as lies in my power, an additional proof
of that disposition, that I hastily cause a copy to be made of the
letter of Count Bertrand, in order that your Lordship may possess
direct and authentic knowledge of that document, and lay it before his
Royal Highness the Prince Regent.

A prey to bodily sufferings, caused by the insalubrious climate of St.
Helena, as well as to the moral sufferings by which my separation was
aggravated; the deplorable state of my health is such that every kind
of application is forbidden to me by the faculty. I cannot, therefore,
add any thing to the letter, of which I have the honour of addressing
you a copy. Besides, what commentary could equal the bare recital of
the facts which it contains?

I have the honour to be, with the highest consideration, my Lord, &c.

P. S.—After having addressed your Lordship on the subject of interests
of so high and sacred an importance, may I be allowed to take
advantage of the opportunity thus naturally afforded to descend to the
consideration of objects that are merely personal to me?

Am I not to expect any redress, or to obtain any answer concerning the
numerous grievances of which I have complained? Am I, above all, to
continue to be deprived of the papers which have now been detained at
St. Helena two years, notwithstanding the many protestations which I
made to Sir Hudson Lowe himself; notwithstanding the letter which I
had the honour of addressing to his Royal Highness the Prince Regent,
on that subject, from the Cape of Good Hope; the letter which I wrote
to one of your colleagues from the same place, and on the same
subject; and, lastly, notwithstanding the letter which I addressed to
Lord Bathurst from Frankfort? Can this obstinate and absolute silence,
to demands so just and so often reiterated, be intended as a formal
denial of justice? I cannot believe it, my Lord. I know the power and
superiority of your laws, and the respect which every Englishman is
bound to shew to them, whatever his rank or situation in life may be;
and I must therefore suppose that the fault lies with me, who, not
knowing how to act, transgress, in all probability, the established
rules and formalities. But, in that case, my Lord, would it not be
proper, just, and considerate, to inform me of those rules, or even to
dispense with them?—My Lord, I demand that favour of your generosity.
Those papers, which I allowed Sir Hudson Lowe to peruse at the time,
are, from their nature, entirely foreign to the object of the custody
of your prisoner; they cannot be of any importance to you in that
point of view; and to me they are dear and invaluable beyond all
expression.

           LETTER FROM COUNT BERTRAND TO COUNT DE LAS CASES.

MY DEAR LAS CASES,—I received, on the 7th of June, the letter which
you did me the honour to write to me on the 15th of January last; and
I have since then received, on the 13th of this month, your letters of
15th February, 15th March, and 15th April;[39] the contents of which I
have communicated to the Emperor, and which have determined him to
desire me to write to you. I received, four months ago, a box of books
and pamphlets, addressed to me by Mr. Goulburn; and since then, a very
obliging offer to send a picture, which was in the bed-chamber at St.
Cloud, representing the christening of little Napoleon. Mr. Henry
Goulburn had been kind enough to bargain with the owner of the picture
for its purchase, and to get the price reduced to half the original
demand. No answer has been returned to that offer, because it has
seemed to form so strange a contrast with what takes place here, that
it has been looked upon as a measure connected with parliamentary
discussions, something like those relative to the wooden house. I have
been much struck by the polite behaviour observed towards you, and by
all you tell me in your last letter.[40]... Can it be, that the
horrible vexations which we are made to experience are not sanctioned
by the English Government, and that the Emperor is dying here a victim
of the individual hatred of the Governor? Governments and Princes may
be so easily deceived that I write this letter under strong feelings
of doubt on the subject.

Footnote 39:

  See those letters in the sequel of these pages.

Footnote 40:

  Experience seems to have proved too clearly that there existed more
  knowledge of mankind at Longwood than in the Frankfort
  correspondent.

Things are much altered since your departure in 1817. And in this
year, 1818, the vexations to which the Emperor has been exposed are
such that they must be considered as an attempt against his life. You
will judge by the detail. You must have read in the papers of March
some observations upon the speech of Lord Bathurst. But things have
grown considerably worse since then; and the hatred of the Governor of
this Island has known no bounds.

When you left us, the Emperor had renounced riding, in order to avoid
the snares laid, and the affronts intended, for him, by causing him to
be insulted by the sentries. He has since been obliged to give up
walking, in order to avoid the same inconveniences. During the months
of March and April, the Emperor went out sometimes to call upon my
wife, and sometimes he would sit upon a certain bench, which you know,
about fifty paces from the house, and where he would stay half an hour
or an hour. But means have been found to prevent him from doing that,
and to oblige him to confine himself strictly to the house. They knew
that this was not very difficult. A soldier of the 66th regiment was
placed as gardener, and a serjeant had been stationed at my house.
Both were very useful, either in rooting out weeds, which might poison
the air, for no garden can exist in such a situation; or in repairing
the house, which is in a ruinous state, and admits water whenever it
rains. That arrangement appears very rational; but the Governor had
invested these two soldiers with a right to stop whomsoever they
thought proper, even at the doors and under the very windows of the
Emperor. From that moment he has not stirred out of the house, and one
hundred days have now elapsed since he has even put his head outside
of a window.

This climate, this absolute want of exercise, added to the badness of
the habitation, have affected his health to such a degree that you
would not recognise him. Since the end of September, 1817, he has had
the first symptoms of a chronic hepatitis, which, as you know, is
mortal in this country. He had to attend on him the worthy O’Meara, in
whom, you know, he has confidence; but, in the month of April, at the
moment when he was most in want of his attention, Sir Hudson Lowe
obliged him to tender his resignation, wishing to force the Emperor to
have Baxter, whom you also know. The Emperor has refused to see any
doctor; from the 10th April to the 10th May, he had none. At last, the
Russian and Austrian Commissioners, indignant at this treatment,
informed the Governor that, if the Emperor were to die under these
circumstances, they themselves should not know what to say, should an
opinion prevail in Europe that he had been murdered. This seems to
have determined the Governor to reinstate the Doctor; but he has
subjected him to every species of ill treatment. He attempted to get
him expelled from the mess of the 66th regiment; and, as these brave
officers refused to share in so arbitrary an act, he himself caused an
order to be given to the Doctor, through the Colonel, to cease to dine
with the officers of the 66th. He has written to London, and it is
probable that O’Meara will be sent away. The Emperor will not,
however, receive any other Doctor; and if the Prince Regent, or Lord
Liverpool, do not take cognizance of the fact, he will die here of his
disease, deprived of even the assistance of his physician. The Emperor
has, however, been very ill for the last two months. He rises at
eleven o’clock in the morning, and lies down again at two o’clock p.
m. A few days ago, he experienced a very violent crisis, produced by
the mercury which Dr. O’Meara administered to him for a liver
complaint. Dr. O’Meara, alarmed at his responsibility, proposed to me
to send for Mr. Baxter and the surgeon of the Conqueror; they are the
two first medical men here. You know the dislike which the Emperor had
to Mr. Baxter, founded upon his having been formerly Staff-surgeon of
the Italian division commanded by Sir Hudson Lowe. That dislike has
much encreased since, in consequence of his having lent himself,

from October, 1817, to March, 1818, to the production of bulletins
filled with falsehoods, and which have deceived his Government and all
Europe. But the Emperor did not see any inconvenience in O’Meara’s
calling in Mr. Stokoe, although he did not much like it; and that
gentleman consequently came to Longwood at three o’clock in the
afternoon of the same day, but would not go into the Emperor’s
apartment, fearing lest he should compromise his responsibility, and
lose a situation obtained after forty years’ service. This appeared to
me so extraordinary that I would not believe it. I therefore spoke to
him, and he expressed his regret at not being able to comply with our
wishes; for he is a very respectable man. His refusal is, however,
easily explained; it proceeded from a hint that had been given to him,
in the same manner as had been done to Cole, the banker, whom you
know. Having some money matters to settle with him, I sent for him;
but, on arriving at my house, he declared that he could not speak to
me but in presence of the officer on duty, because he should be ruined
if he did. Of course I refused. The same thing happened, a few days
since, with a Mr. Fowler, arrived from England, with whom I had an
account of a few hundred pounds to settle, for clothes ordered in
London. It is true that you are not acquainted with the situation in
which we are now placed, and which cannot be compared to what it was
in your time. It was even then sufficiently unpleasant; and, knowing
the Emperor as you do, you ought to have strenuously opposed the idea
of any member of his family coming out hither. The spectacle of the
humiliations, the vexations, and the hatred to which he is exposed,
would be altogether unbearable for him, if his mother or any of his
brothers were to share in it. Even to Count Montholon and myself, who
are now the only two with him, he has often said that he wished us to
quit St. Helena, to free ourselves from such a treatment, and to leave
him alone; and that his agony would be less bitter if he did not see
us share in it. You know that the officers had long since discontinued
to come to my house; but, when we met them on the road, they would
very politely stop and speak to my wife; this has now been forbidden
to them, not in writing, it is true, but by hints; so that it has
often happened that when they have seen us at a distance they have
gone out of the road.

Things have come to such a pass that our dirty linen remains several
days, to be examined by the Captain on duty, and sometimes by the
Staff; a most indecent proceeding, and most dishonourable for them,
but the object of which is to degrade and insult us.

In the month of June 1816, a store-ship brought out a marble bust of
young Napoleon: Sir Hudson Lowe ordered the bust to be thrown into the
sea. This he has since denied; but we have the fact judicially
attested; for the act disgusted Lady Malcolm, who was still at St.
Helena, as well as all the captains of store-ships that were on the
island.

Since that time, in February last, the Cambridge store-ship brought
out two prints of young Napoleon, which had been bought in London: Sir
Hudson Lowe purchased them under pretence of presenting them to the
Father, and when the officers heard, a month afterwards, that it was,
on the contrary, to keep them from him, they could not contain their
indignation that an Englishman should have been guilty of such
conduct.

The British Government cannot be ignorant of all these proceedings. If
what the Emperor said here to Lord Amherst has been repeated in
London, if Captain Poppleton, whom you know, and who was the officer
on duty during two years, has been questioned, if Colonel Nichols of
the 66th regiment, and Colonel Fehrzen of the 53d regiment have been
questioned, as well as many others, it must be known to what unworthy
treatment we are exposed here.

If there be in Europe some enemies of the Emperor, who would have
approved the conduct of the British Government if they had taken away
Napoleon’s life, openly and publicly, on board of the Bellerophon,
there is not one who will not some day cover with imprecations and
opprobrium and disown those who adopt such cowardly means to attain
that end.

How are we to reconcile all this with what you write to me? perhaps by
the supposition of a correspondence filled with falsehoods, and
artfully managed. However, we on our side have for the last two years
complained openly and loudly; and the criminal conduct pursued here
must be known in London,

You will be surprised to hear me speak of the French, Austrian, and
Russian Commissioners who are here. We never saw them during the time
you were with us, and to this day they have not yet seen the Emperor
nor called upon us. But we have frequently met them on the roads
within our limits, which is a way of seeing each other sufficiently
ridiculous. Though the Emperor does not acknowledge them as
Commissioners, he has never refused to receive them as strangers.

With respect to the Governor, the Emperor has not seen him since the
month of April, 1816: you are aware of the reasons which induced him
not to receive him, after the insults which the Governor had offered
him.

This being the case, if Sir Hudson Lowe seeks to be revenged, such a
proceeding, though inconsistent with a generous mind, can be easily
explained. But how can Government have continued, during two years, to
repose its confidence in a man who has so strangely abused it?

I therefore earnestly request you, in the Emperor’s name, to inform
his family and relations of the situation in which he is placed; and
peremptorily to require that none of them will encrease his sufferings
by coming to share in them.

You tell us that the English Government has subscribed for us to the
Morning Chronicle; but the same thing happens with this paper as with
the Times; it is sent to us after those numbers which it is thought
proper to conceal from us have been previously withdrawn. Thus we have
had some numbers of February and some of March, but all those that it
was their pleasure to withdraw have never been sent to us. Not to have
a regular series of a newspaper is worse than to have none.

How could any book be sent to us, since, as soon as a store-ship comes
out, the Governor immediately purchases all the books they have
brought out, particularly French books, in order to prevent our buying
them?

With respect to the pamphlets, which you announce as sent to us, we
only received one box of them on the 12th March, from which we
conclude that probably the remainder have been kept.

I have read this letter to the Emperor, who has approved of its
contents, but has thought that I had very feebly expressed the
baseness of the conduct observed towards him. He desires me to send
you two notes written by himself, which will give you the whole of his
opinion respecting the officer to whom the superintendence of this
country has been intrusted. The calomel which the Emperor has taken
has not hitherto had any beneficial effect on the liver, and has
produced other ailments.

Accept, my dear Las Cases, the assurance of affectionate feelings
which I entertain towards you.

                                                       COUNT BERTRAND.

P. S. During the few days that have elapsed since this letter was
written, many things have happened which will prove to you that our
situation, far from improving, as you seem to suppose, is daily
growing worse.

You know that Captain Mackey of the 53d regiment, had been succeeded
at Longwood, as officer on duty, by Captain Poppleton of the same
regiment, and that Poppleton, at his departure, had been succeeded by
Captain Blackeney of the 66th, who, like his predecessors, enjoyed a
most excellent reputation in his regiment. This latter officer already
thought, on the first days after his arrival, that the Governor
required of him some acts unworthy of a man of honour; but as the
number of those objectionable acts had greatly increased since that
time, he at last ardently longed for the expiration of his year of
service in that degrading post, in order to have nothing more to do
with it. It is known that he declared confidentially to his friends in
the regiment, that it was impossible for a man of honour to continue
in that post without losing his own esteem. It may be also that Sir
Hudson Lowe was not satisfied with the avowed sentiments of Captain
Blackeney; be that as it may, on the 20th of this month, an officer
who had been sent out to take the command of the militia, and whose
former connexion with Sir Hudson Lowe is known to you, the only one
out of the whole of the Governor’s staff whom the Emperor refused to
see, came to instal himself as officer on duty, and with him, under
various pretences, another officer, so that we had two instead of one.
It appears that some rooms and articles belonging to Government, which
had been given in common between the officer on duty and Doctor
O’Meara, have occasioned some violent contentions between them.

On the 22nd I sent the protest marked A[41] to the Governor, who sent
me a challenge by the officer alluded to. It was beneath my character
and my situation to provoke Sir Hudson Lowe, but on this occasion I
thought proper to address to him the letter marked B.[41]

On the 24th, he sent Dr. O’Meara away from Longwood, by virtue, he
said, of an order from Lord Bathurst, as you will see by the
Governor’s letter to Count Montholon, marked C.[41] to which Count
Montholon answered by the letter marked D.[41]

Footnote 41:

  See these letters in the following pages.

Doctor O’Meara, you know, was attached to the Emperor, instead of his
own physician, by a decision of the Council, and in consequence of a
special demand to that effect, addressed by me to Admiral Keith; he
could not therefore be taken away from the Emperor, but by an order in
Council. If such an order exists, why are we not made acquainted with
it? Certainly neither the Council nor Lord Bathurst would have removed
from the Emperor the physician of his own choice, without having
previously supplied his place by another, in whom the Emperor had
confidence; they would have felt the responsibility attached to such a
step.

But if even there had been an order in Council, it would not justify
the Governor; for that order, given under ordinary circumstances,
could not be carried into execution at the moment when the Emperor was
seriously indisposed. It never can have been intended that his
physician should be taken from him amidst his attendance in the case
of a disease of so serious a nature, and which threatens his
existence; particularly as since the month of April it has been
demanded that if it were intended to take Dr. O’Meara away from him,
another physician should be sent out from Europe in his stead, in whom
the Emperor has confidence. The answer to this demand must arrive
before three months are elapsed.

I conclude, my dear Las Cases: my heart is broken.

                                                             BERTRAND.

         FIRST NOTE, WRITTEN BY THE EMPEROR, ON THE BACK OF SIR
            HUDSON LOWE’S LETTER, DATED 18th NOVEMBER, 1817.

This letter, and the letters dated 24th July and 26th October last,
are filled with falsehoods. I have shut myself up in my apartment for
eighteen months, in order to shelter myself from the insults of this
officer. My health is now impaired, and will no longer allow me to
read such disgusting documents; send me no more of them.

Whether that officer considers himself authorized by verbal and secret
instructions from his minister, as he has given us to understand that
he does, or whether he acts of his own accord, which might be inferred
from the care which he takes to act with disguise, I cannot treat him
but as my assassin.

Had they sent out to this country a man of honour, not only I should
have experienced fewer vexations, but they would have saved themselves
many reproaches from Europe and history, which the farrago of writing
of this crafty man will not deceive.

                                                             NAPOLEON.

_Longwood_, 23d November, 1817.

           SECOND NOTE, INSERTED IN THE MARGIN OF SIR THOMAS
          READE’S LETTER TO COUNT BERTRAND, DATED 25th APRIL,
                                 1818.

1.—I TOLD you yesterday, when you presented this letter to me, that I
would not know its contents, and that you were not to translate it to
me, since it is not conformable to the forms adopted for the last
three years.

2.—This fresh insult only dishonours that coxcomb. The King of England
alone can treat with me on a footing of equality.

3.—This crafty line of conduct has however an object: to prevent you
from disclosing _the criminal plot which has been carried on for the
last two years against my life_.

4.—It is thus that, while they appear to open a channel for
complaints, they in fact close every avenue.

5.—Thus, with the appearance of a wish to provide me with a house, and
after announcing a building for the last three years, I am however
still in this unhealthy barn, and no building is begun.

6.—It is thus that, whilst it appears that I am at liberty to ride on
horseback, indirect means are resorted to to prevent me from doing so
and from taking exercise; the want of which is the primary cause of my
complaint.

7.—The same means are resorted to, to prevent me from receiving any
visit. It is necessary for them to veil themselves in darkness.

8.—It is thus that, after having attacked my physician, after having
obliged him to tender his resignation, not wishing to be a passive
instrument and deprived of all moral independence, he is nevertheless
kept under arrest at Longwood, in order that it may be believed that I
have the benefit of his attendance, when it is well known that I will
not see him, that I have not seen him for the last fortnight, that I
never will see him as long as he is not set at liberty, and freed from
the oppression under which he is placed, and until he has regained his
moral independence in what concerns the exercise of his functions.

9.—It is thus that a false representation is made by causing bulletins
to be issued by a physician who has never seen me, and does not know
the state in which I am, nor the disease with which I am affected; but
that does very well to deceive the Prince and the people of England
and Europe.

10.—A ferocious joy is manifested at the aggravation of sufferings
which this privation of medical assistance adds to my protracted
agony.

11.—Demand that this note be sent to Lord Liverpool, as also your
letter of yesterday, and of 13th and 14th April, in order that the
Prince Regent may know my murderer, and may cause him to be brought to
public punishment.

12.—If he does not, _I bequeath the opprobrium of my death_ to the
reigning House of England.

                                                             NAPOLEON.

_Longwood, 27th April, 1818._

          Document A. PROTEST ADDRESSED TO THE GOVERNOR, ON
                         THE 22d JULY, 1818.

In the name of the Emperor Napoleon, I am enjoined to protest,

1.—Against all violation of our enclosure by servants, workmen or
others, whom you would secretly invest with public authority.

2.—Against the insults offered to Dr. O’Meara to compel him to leave
this place, and against the obstructions, either public or secret,
which you have opposed or may oppose to Napoleon’s being assisted in
his illness by the advice of some medical officer in whom he may have
confidence, who may be accredited in the service of his Britannic
Majesty, or known to practise publicly in the island.

3.—Against all testimonies, reports and writings of the militia
officer Hyster, who is only placed at Longwood to be an instrument of
hatred and vengeance.

                                                       COUNT BERTRAND.

            Document B. TO THE GOVERNOR, SIR HUDSON LOWE.

                                           _Longwood, 23d July, 1818._

SIR,—I have the honour to transmit to you a letter which I have just
received. The old man appears to me to be out of his senses. He can
have no knowledge of my official correspondence but by your orders. I
have not answered him, and shall not do so. He is only a subordinate
agent, and if his principal, a general officer, wishes to demand
satisfaction of me, I am ready to grant it.

                          I have the honour to be,

                                                       COUNT BERTRAND.

             Document C. THE GOVERNOR TO COUNT MONTHOLON.

                                  _Plantation House, 25th July, 1818._

SIR,—I do myself the honour to state to you, for the information of
Napoleon Bonaparte, that agreeably to the instructions which I have
received from Lord Bathurst, dated 16th May, 1818, I am directed to
remove Mr. O’Meara from his situation near the person of Napoleon
Bonaparte, and that I have accordingly given orders for him to leave
Longwood immediately. Rear Admiral Plampin has received, at the same
time, instructions from the Lords of the Admiralty to remove him from
this island. Lord Bathurst’s instructions further direct that, after
Mr. O’Meara’s departure, I am to order Dr. Baxter to attend upon
Napoleon Bonaparte, as physician, whenever he is requested to do so;
and that I am to inform him that he is to consider the health of
Napoleon Bonaparte as the chief object of his attention. On
communicating this arrangement, I am strictly enjoined to state, at
the same time, that if Napoleon Bonaparte has any reason not to be
satisfied with the medical attendance of Dr. Baxter, or if he prefers
any other physician of this Island, I am quite ready to acquiesce in
his wishes in that respect, and to allow any other medical
practitioner whom he may select to attend upon him, provided he
strictly conform to the rules established and now in force.

Having given Dr. O’Meara the orders for his departure, I have
furnished Mr. Baxter with the necessary instructions, and he will be
ready to repair to Longwood at the first summons. In the meantime,
until I am informed of the wishes of Napoleon Bonaparte on this
subject, I shall order a medical officer to be stationed at Longwood,
to be ready in case of emergency.

                      I have the honour to be, &c.

                                              HUDSON LOWE, Lieut.-Gen.

             Document D. COUNT MONTHOLON TO THE GOVERNOR.

SIR,—Dr. O’Meara quitted Longwood yesterday, being compelled to leave
his patient in the midst of the course of medicine which he was
prescribing for him; that course has ceased this morning. From this
morning a great crime is in progress!!! Nothing remains to be added to
Count Bertrand’s letters of the 13th, 24th, 26th and 27th April last.
The Emperor will never receive any other physician than Mr. O’Meara,
because he is the physician attached to him, or than the one who may
be sent from Europe to him, in conformity with the letter of the 13th
of August, which has been already mentioned.

I have communicated the letter you addressed to me yesterday. What I
have now the honour of writing to you is the substance of the reply I
have been desired to transmit.

                                             I have, &c.

                                                    COUNT MONTHOLON.

           LETTER OF COUNT BERTRAND TO HIS EMINENCE CARDINAL
                               FESCH.[42]

Footnote 42:

  We have thought it right to insert here this letter, because it
  affords additional details respecting the interior of Longwood, and
  adds new features to all that has been said of its real situation.

MY LORD,—The Sieur Cypriani, the Emperor’s steward, died at Longwood,
on the 27th of February last, at four in the afternoon. He was
interred in the Protestant burial-ground of this island, and the
ministers of their church have observed on this occasion the same
rites that they would have performed for one of their own persuasion.
Care has been taken that, in the extract from the register of deaths
which I shall send to you, though this paragraph of my letter might
answer the purpose, it should be stated that he died in the bosom of
the Roman Catholic church. The minister of the church of this country
would willingly have attended the deceased on his death-bed; but the
latter was anxious for a Catholic priest; and, as we have none, he
appeared to have no wish to see a clergyman of any other religion. I
should be glad if you would let us know what is the law of the
Catholic church upon this point, and whether a Catholic on his
death-bed may be attended by a minister of the church of England. We
cannot, however, sufficiently praise the proper feeling and the zeal
which were evinced on the present occasion by the clergy of the
island. Cypriani died of an inflammation in the bowels. He expired on
a Friday, and had attended his duties on the preceding Sunday without
having any presentiment of his approaching end. A child of one of
Count Montholon’s servants had died at Longwood a few days before. A
waiting-woman died some days ago of the same complaint. Such is the
effect of this unhealthy climate, in which few live to old age. Liver
complaints, dysentery, and inflammations in the bowels, carry off many
of the natives, but a still greater number of Europeans. We felt upon
this occasion, as we feel every day, the want of a minister of our own
persuasion. As you are our bishop, we wish you would send us out one,
either a Frenchman or an Italian. You will, in that case, select a man
of education, under forty years of age, and especially of a mild
disposition, and not imbued with antigallican principles.

The steward’s duty has devolved upon Mr. Pierron, of the household,
but he has been very ill; and, though convalescent, is still in a bad
state of health. The cook is in a similar condition. It would be,
therefore, necessary that either you, or Prince Eugene, or the
Empress, should send out a steward and a French or an Italian cook,
taken from amongst those who have been in the Emperor’s service, or
who may still be in the service of his family.

Your Eminence will find annexed: 1.—The papers found in M. Cypriani’s
portfolio; 2.—A brooch which he was in the habit of wearing, and which
I have thought it right to send home for his wife; 3.—An account of
all that is coming to him, amounting to 8,287 francs, or 345_l._ 5_s._
10_d._ sterling; 4.—A bill of exchange in favour of his heirs, for the
settlement of that account. The Emperor, knowing that his son is under
your care, and that his daughter is with Madame, only delays securing
an annuity to both his children, until he shall have been informed of
the fortune left by Cypriani, who appears to have funds in Genoa to a
rather considerable amount.

I will not afflict you by dwelling upon the state of the Emperor’s
health, which is not satisfactory. It has not, however, become worse
since the hot weather. I hope you will keep these details concealed
from Madame. Give no credit to the false reports that may be
circulated in Europe. Consider as the only fact that may be relied on
that for these twenty-two months past the Emperor has only quitted his
apartment occasionally, though very seldom, in order to pay a visit to
my wife. He has hardly seen any one, unless it be two or three
Frenchmen who are here, and the English Ambassador to China.

I beg that your Eminence will present my respects to Madame, and to
the individuals of her family, and accept the homage of the sentiments
with which I have the honour to be, &c.

                                                       COUNT BERTRAND.

           FIRST LETTER OF THE COUNT DE LAS CASES TO GENERAL
                          COUNT BERTRAND.[43]

I am going to devote to you the first moment that I can command. It is
now upwards of a year since I quitted Longwood; and during that time,
what troubles, what cares, what misfortunes of every kind have I not
had to contend with!!! I leave it to the newspapers to give you an
account of my tribulations. I shall avoid in my letters every
expression, every subject, that might afford a pretext for their being
withheld from you. I will promote, by all means in my power, the only
object I have in view, which is that you should receive from me the
proofs of a devotedness that will occupy every instant of the
remainder of my life. I have but too present to my mind the
consolation and happiness that I derived, when in your company, from
European recollections, not to give all my attention to the object of
procuring you that kind of consolation: Oh, my dear companions! who
will henceforth engross my thoughts of every day, and of every moment!
I am, therefore, writing to you on the first instant of freedom that I
enjoy from personal restraint; and regularly every month, on the same
day, I shall at least give you this token of my incessant anxiety for
you. Obstacles, perhaps, over which I shall have no control, may
prevent your receiving my letters; but, as far as regards me, death
alone can make me fail in my promise; and here I appeal to the
feelings of those who, being intrusted with the censorship of my
letters, might fancy that they found in their expressions some motives
for intercepting them. I beseech them to let me know of any
involuntary deviations on my part that might appear reprehensible to
them, in order that I may avoid them for the future. The necessity and
the consolation of domestic sentiments cannot be prohibited by public
morality: and such are the only sentiments which I shall endeavour to
gratify in writing to you.

I have just obtained in Austria the asylum which I demanded, as soon
as I found that my liberty was in danger. I shall repair to Lintz so
soon as the wretched state of my health will allow me to undertake the
journey. The headaches which first attacked me at the Cape are daily
encreasing in violence, and give me much uneasiness. I shall avail
myself of the free intercourse which is henceforth allowed me, in
order to procure some exact information respecting all those that may
be dear to you. To-day I can only give you such information as I have
been able to collect indirectly.

My wife, who, by the greatest good fortune, was refused permission to
go out to St. Helena, at the very moment when I was leaving it, and
who came to meet me upon the road, where I was carried about like a
bale of goods, is now on her return to Paris, whence she will bring
back the rest of my children. She will enable me to afford you some
details in my next letter concerning your family, and those of
Montholon and of Gourgaud.

I have been able to ascertain that H.M. Maria Louisa enjoyed excellent
health in Parma, and that nothing can exceed the health and beauty of
her son, who is at Schœnbrunn. The Countess de Survilliers is
detained here by the very infirm state of her health; she occasionally
receives news from her husband, who is quite well, in America. Both
her daughters are also well. The eldest bears a striking resemblance
to the august head of the family. Princess Borghese, Madame, the
Emperor’s mother, Prince Canino, Cardinal Fesch, and Prince Louis, are
at Rome, and in the enjoyment of excellent health; the remainder of
the family, Princess Eliza, Count de Montfort, and Princess Murat,
reside in various parts of Austria. I hope that in time I shall be
able to send you more direct and positive details. I feel the most
bitter regret that I was not able to land and fix my abode in England.
I am deprived of the means of procuring and sending immediately
whatever I might have thought calculated to afford you some trifling
diversion upon your horrible rock. This is a religious duty imposed
upon me, which I have solicited, and shall continue every day to
solicit, the British Ministers to allow me to fulfil. My constant
endeavours to persuade them upon that point will not allow me to
despair of success. Nevertheless, however far I may be from the spot,
I shall not fail to attain so sacred an object by the assistance of
some intermediate person; only you will receive the results of my
cares and of my efforts in a less complete manner, and at a later
period.

Be careful all of you of your health; live for the consolation, the
affection, the happiness, and the wishes of those who admire and love
you.

I received, upon my arrival at Dover, a letter from you, dated the 22d
July, and one of the 29th from Sir Hudson Lowe. They acquainted me
with what was unknown to me until then, that you had received the few
articles I had sent to Longwood from the Cape; that you had received
the document which was handed to me by you, and which I had returned,
respecting the money which at my departure I had presumed to lay at
the feet of the Emperor, and of which I was so happy as to procure the
acceptance. Sir Hudson Lowe informs me that all the bills relating to
this affair, which I had left in your hands, have been negotiated. I
hope they have been duly honoured. I know not yet myself the state of
my affairs. I have not yet had it in my power to write a single line
to my agent in London, or to receive any news from him.

I regret much that T have not in my power, and at my command, the
narrative of the campaigns of Italy. That distant epoch, already
removed from the politics of the present day, possesses henceforth all
the merit of history. It is anxiously wished for. Science and the
contemporaries of that period claim it. I should deem myself fortunate
if that work were confided to my care; and in case you should procure
that favour for me, I shall instantly take the means of availing
myself of it without delay, by at once inquiring in London, what are
the previous formalities that would be required, both in England and
at St. Helena, in order that I might receive that manuscript. I shall
request that the reply to me may be likewise transmitted to Sir H.
Lowe, in order that you may judge whether there would be no objection
on your part to do what might be required of you.

Write to me dear General, in your turn, by every opportunity; give me
all the commissions that may occur to your mind, whether serious or
trifling, easy or difficult, it matters not. Be persuaded, and
constantly bear in mind, that I live only for you and through you all.
My body alone has left your rock.

                                                   COUNT DE LAS CASES.

Footnote 43:

  It has been thought necessary to introduce here the following
  letters of Count de Las Cases; 1.—Because they are alluded to in the
  preceding letter from Count Bertrand, and help to complete the sense
  and understanding of it; 2.—Because they evince the candour and good
  faith with which this correspondence with Longwood was carried on;
  3.—In short, because they enable the reader to give its due value to
  the extraordinary assertion of Mr. Goulburn, who, whilst he received
  these letters, and acknowledged with courtesy the receipt of them,
  nevertheless ventured to affirm in the House of Commons, on a
  certain occasion, that the author’s expressions were always clothed
  in language admitting of a twofold interpretation. How can a man of
  candour, such as the person to whom the aforesaid letters were
  addressed, who had received, and must have read my letter to Lord
  Bathurst particularly, take upon himself to assert that the author’s
  expressions were always given in language that admitted of a double
  interpretation? Surely, Mr. Goulburn must be very fastidious in
  point of explicit and positive meaning, or else he does not
  understand French. But has he read? Has he misunderstood? Did he
  wish to misunderstand, and, in imitation of Lord Bathurst, may he
  not, like his noble patron, on the occasion of his famous denials to
  Lord Holland in the House of Peers, have founded his arguments not
  upon what really existed, but upon what appeared to his advantage?
  The communication of these letters is made chiefly from the
  necessity of enabling every one to judge of the degree of credit
  which is due to Mr. Goulburn’s assertion. That they were not
  intended to be made public is sufficiently evident from the careless
  and unaffected style in which they are written.

             SECOND LETTER OF COUNT DE LAS CASES TO GENERAL
                            COUNT BERTRAND.

                                           _Frankfort, 26 Jan., 1818._

Faithful to my promise, I write to you after the lapse of one month,
and on the same day on which my first letter was dated. I have at
heart to record the identical date, so that you may depend upon its
never being passed over without my addressing you. Some passages,
however, in my letter may perhaps be written subsequently to its date,
owing to the silence of Madame de Las Cases, whose letters I was in
daily expectation of receiving from Paris. It is now about a month
since she left me. She proposed calling upon all your relations, and
upon those of Generals Gourgaud and Montholon. She was to send me the
most circumstantial details respecting them. To my great surprise, I
have not heard from her, and as I do not wish to delay any longer
writing to you, I am under the necessity of postponing till next month
all the particulars, which I am quite certain she will have collected
with as much zeal and as much care as I could have done myself.

I have the satisfaction to know that my first letter has been
forwarded to you: I had enclosed it in one to Mr. Goulburn; his answer
has just reached me. I acknowledge with real pleasure that it is
filled with expressions of kind consideration, and is in all respects
satisfactory; this leads me to hope that what had hitherto taken place
proceeded from mutual misunderstanding.

He assures me of the readiness that will exist at all times to forward
my letters to you, so long as they shall be of the same nature as the
first, and not liable to any greater objections. He adds that,
conformably to my request, the books and pamphlets I may point out
will be sent to you. He offers to procure them, and to superintend
himself their regular transmission, taking care to remit to me from
time to time a note of their cost, in order that I may settle the
amount. He informs me that in case the Emperor shall think proper to
confide to me the _Campaigns in Italy_, Sir Hudson Lowe is forthwith
to receive instructions to transmit it to England, whence it will be
forwarded and delivered to me in the manner that may be desired at
Longwood, after taking such cognizance of it as may be deemed
necessary. Lastly, he apprizes me that my papers which were seized in
the Thames had been instantly sent back to me unopened; and that if I
had not yet received them, which is still the case, accident alone
could have occasioned the delay.

I am therefore in hopes that you will receive some publications with
this very letter. I am unfortunately at a great distance and
unpleasantly situated for selecting them, and for procuring them while
new; but I will immediately write to London to remedy this
inconvenience. I likewise hope that by the same opportunity I may be
able to send you many things of which you stand in need, or that may
prove acceptable to you, and others that may be of essential service
to the Emperor’s health.

Her Majesty Maria Louisa is quite well, and still resides in Parma.
Her son, from a late account given by a person who had seen him at a
juvenile ball, is remarkably handsome, and is the delight of all
Vienna. Such were the expressions used. He dances admirably, and is
passionately fond of that amusement.

All the members of the Emperor’s family have evinced the kindest and
most affectionate interest towards me. They have loaded me with offers
and good wishes. I shall fortunately have it in my power to afford you
regular accounts of them every month.

Prince Jerome has caused me to be assured that his offers of service
would know no other bounds than those of _impossibility_. He has given
an asylum near his person to the worthy and virtuous Planat, who,
after our separation on board the _Bellerophon_, was tossed about by
storms, and on the point of perishing on the coast. Princess Hortense
informs me that she has suffered much persecution; but that if the
torments inflicted upon her have originated in the tender and
respectful devotedness which fills her heart, they are a source of
pride and of happiness to her.

Whenever my health will allow me, I go to pay my respects to Princess
Joseph, who is confined to the most absolute retirement, and chiefly
to her bed, by the bad state of her health. We talk of St. Helena. Our
thoughts traverse the seas; those are happy moments for us. Her
daughters are quite well; her husband, from very late accounts, was
likewise well. He had taken under his care two of the Emperor
Napoleon’s servants, whom the British government had thought proper to
retrench from the establishment of Longwood.

Prince Lucien gives me an account of all those of the family who are
assembled in Rome. Madame, Cardinal Fesch, Princess Borghese, and
Prince Louis are all in the enjoyment of good health, and unite in
wishes and prayers for the health and preservation of their august
relative. As for Prince Lucien, he says he is happy in Rome; he has
just provided advantageously for his three daughters. Yet his mind and
his heart are incessantly directed towards St. Helena. He can no
longer reconcile himself to the idea of seeing his brother languishing
and dying in exile. He desires that I will candidly tell him whether
the Emperor would be as happy to see him as he himself would be to
appear before him; and conformably to his desire I write to the
British Government by the courier who bears this letter, to request
they will allow him to proceed to St. Helena, and to reside there a
couple of years or for life, if his brother does not send him away,
with or without his wife and children: his wife wishing to share in
the honour of his exile: and further, to state that he will engage not
to occasion any augmentation of expense, either for himself or for his
suite, and that he will submit to the same restrictions that are
imposed upon his brother, and to any others that it might be thought
proper to impose upon him personally, either before his departure, or
after his return.

I cannot refrain, my dear General, from again requesting you will
ascertain if the Emperor would intrust to me the _Campaigns in Italy_;
you might next forward to me those of Egypt in their turn. They are
both real treasures for the learned world and for history, quite
foreign to the politics of the present day, and consequently not
liable to any objection. I have written to London to convey the
Countess Bertrand’s thanks for the friendly recollections that were so
kindly expressed towards her, and the amiable attentions that were
shewn to her children. If I had had it in my power to remain in
England, I should have endeavoured to find out upon the spot some
articles that I might have thought acceptable to the ladies. At this
distance I can command nothing beyond my good wishes; they are very
sincere towards them and towards you all, my dear companions. The
fatal rock is ever impressed upon my heart.

I am still far from being well: my headaches are daily increasing; the
physicians are at a loss to give an opinion upon the subject. May God
be pleased to preserve my health, for the service and benefit of those
who are dearest to my heart. I embrace you all affectionately. Take
care of yourselves, and may you enjoy good health; it will be my
reward, and the reward of your friends, who love you as I do.

                                                   COUNT DE LAS CASES.

            THIRD LETTER FROM COUNT DE LAS CASES TO GENERAL
                            COUNT BERTRAND.

                                          _Frankfort, March 15, 1818._

I experience a certain pleasure, my dear General, in writing my third
letter to you, from the thought that my first must now be very near
reaching you. I hope my second is already on its way to St. Helena,
although I am not fortunate enough to be certain of it. A great many
publications were to be sent on at the same time, and I am going to
transmit a note of some others to be sent with the present letter.

I have just heard from my wife, who is on the point of quitting Paris
to come with my children and reside with me. She informs me that she
had seen the family of General Gourgaud, and had given to them all the
details which she had heard from me concerning himself and your
establishment at Longwood. His mother and his sister are both very
well, and send him the assurance of their most affectionate love and
good wishes. Your family, Grand Marshal, was in one of the provinces,
and for some time past no news had been received from them. With
respect to the family of Count Montholon, Madame de Las Cases has not
been fortunate enough to meet with anybody belonging to it. I hope to
be able in my next letter to speak of your friends, notwithstanding
they are away from the capital.

All the members of the Emperor’s family are quite well. I have heard
of every one of them since my last, and shall hear every month, so as
to be able to transmit regular information to you. They all follow him
with their good wishes, and live only for him. Most of them had been
hitherto entirely deprived of any information respecting him, and the
little that I have been enabled to give has therefore proved most
valuable and dear to them. To satisfy their interest and their
affection, which are both natural, I shall request the British
Government, when they receive news from St. Helena, to allow me to
receive the intelligence of the state of the Emperor’s health; it is a
favour which I shall request in the name of a numerous family, and I
hope it will not be refused to the sentiment which dictates it.

Prince Jerome has done me the honour to inform me that the conditions
attached to the permission of corresponding with his august brother,
and his profound veneration for him whom he acknowledges as his second
father, have alone prevented him from having the happiness of writing
to him, and laying his existence at his feet. If the situation of the
Emperor be not improved next year, he proposes to ask permission of
the British Government to go to St. Helena, with his wife and his son,
supposing that such a voyage could not be opposed by any reasonable
objection. The Queen his wife, to whom nothing is foreign that is
noble and elevated, is inspired with the same sentiments, and
expresses the same wishes.

Cardinal Fesch also writes to me in the name of Madame and in his own,
requesting me to observe that, being the only two whose attention is
not divided by individual ties, arising out of the consideration of a
family, and the fear of exposing it to inconveniences, I must apply to
them in preference for every thing that can contribute to alleviate in
any way the horrible situation of the Emperor.

Countess Survilliers, whom I have the honour of seeing very
frequently, and whose wishes are incessantly turned towards St.
Helena, is in a very indifferent state of health. She suffers very
much, and even occasions some uneasiness. The princesses her daughters
are quite well.

I have just received, at last, my papers which had been seized in the
Thames. They have reached me after four months of useless rambling and
of daily privation to me. Fatality alone can have occasioned the
delay, for they have been returned to me unopened.

I long very much to hear from you, and to receive your commissions.
Unfortunately, the distance is so great, and the communications are so
irregular, that I shall have yet to write for some time. Ask me for
every thing you want; until then I am reduced to guess. You will soon
receive that part of the Moniteur which you have not. I write this day
on the subject.

I have at last received a letter from my agent in London. He informs
me that he has honoured my bills, which I am happy to hear. But he
also informs me that he has received besides from you two other bills,
which he has been under the necessity of refusing, for want of advice
or authority from me. I am sorry for this. Since I have left you, I
had not been able to communicate with him. I have immediately answered
his letter, directing him to remedy the evil as far as it lies in his
power. He does not however give me any particulars respecting those
bills.

My health is still as indifferent as ever, not to say much worse. I am
quite disheartened by it, and the more so, as the season is getting
very fine, and this circumstance does not however produce any
beneficial change to me. That is the reason why I remain at Frankfort,
being placed in the centre of a great number of mineral springs, to
which the physicians intend to send me.

Receive for yourself, Grand Marshal, and for my dear companions, the
expression of my wishes and of all my sentiments. The colony of
Longwood occupies and fills every moment of my existence. Take care of
yourselves. Such is the wish of those who love you. I daily hear it
expressed for you all. There are in this place or in the
neighbourhood, several of the exiles; some were particular
acquaintances of yours. They love and venerate you.

                                                 COUNT DE LAS CASES.

             FOURTH LETTER FROM COUNT LAS CASES TO GENERAL
                            COUNT BERTRAND.

                                        _Frankfort, 15th April, 1818._

Madame Las Cases has continued her inquiries respecting your family
and that of the gentlemen. I have myself written direct. My letters
have been returned to me by a _valet de chambre_. I have learned that
your family were well and undisturbed. The sister of General Gourgaud
has written me a very agreeable letter, full of tenderness for her
brother. As to my third attempt, though repeated, it produced only
absolute silence, You will find, M. Grand Marshal, my details very
barren. It is not my fault: I write to you every thing I can. You will
do wrong to judge, by my want of matter, of all my cares and incessant
exertions.

I continue to receive news of all the members of the family of the
Emperor. They are all well in health. His son continues a fine boy.
The Empress, they write me, is very thin. I have lately seen a person
of the household of the Princess Murat. He was specially charged to
describe to me her tender solicitude for her august brother, her
devotion and her wishes. I have received a letter from the Princess
Eliza, full of the same sentiments. They all live only to think of him
who is so dear to them, who loaded them with kindnesses, and now
engrosses all their affections. The Princess Eliza resides at Trieste.
She informs me that she has written five times to St. Helena. The
Cardinal writes to me, on his part, that they have written very often
from Rome. I have received an answer from London to the request which
I made, and of which I informed you in my last, for leave for Prince
Lucien to visit his august brother. The answer has not appeared
sufficiently explicit for me to send it to you before I have a new
explanation.—Prince Jerome, who talked of making a like attempt next
year, has not been able to postpone for so long a time a step, the
success of which would delight his heart. He is going to address
himself to the Prince Regent, for permission for himself; his wife and
son, to undertake the voyage immediately.

The Cardinal has given me a very full account of all the members of
the family settled at Rome. The Princess Hortense enjoys tranquillity
at Augsburg, where she is occasionally visited by her brother. She is
occupied with the education of her second son. She has had the eldest
with her several months, who has developed, during his short visit,
all the qualities which honour, attach, and interest. He has returned
to Rome to his father, who is settled in that city. I hope that my
first letter has reached you before this; and I reckon the days and
hours that will bring me your answer, because then I shall know more
particularly what I can do to be agreeable to each of you. Be assured
that I and mine only live for this; and that death itself could not
interrupt the course of my efforts for that purpose. I shall have
provided a successor. Let me then know all your wishes. Nothing will
be impossible to my zeal, to the affection and devotion of those who
assist me.

I have received a very polite answer from London respecting all the
articles which I desired to be sent to your address. I am assured that
the several pamphlets, which I mentioned, are about to be sent off. I
am told that the _Morning Chronicle_, the _Journal du Commerce_, and
that of Paris, which they say is the best, have been ordered for you.
As for the rest, upon this point, as upon every other, write to me
your wishes. Tell me every thing that may give pleasure to the
establishment.

As to provisions, wine, coffee, oil, &c. which I mentioned in my
letter, I am answered that a considerable supply, and of the best
quality had been dispatched to you: the list has been sent me. It is
added, Lord Holland had sent a quantity, at the request of the
Princess Borghese: an invoice of that also has been sent me.

My health, unfortunately, is still very deplorable: I see no
amendment. The physicians insist that I shall entirely abstain from
business.—I am going to take the waters somewhere. I shall most
probably inform you, in my next, of my departure from Frankfort. I
have had an opportunity of seeing here several of the exiles, who have
found a temporary refuge in this city or its vicinity. They flatter
themselves daily with their speedy recal. Public opinion demands it,
they are told. It is thought that about the end of the year all the
French will be at liberty to reside in France. I have, however,
myself, been a stranger to the severity exercised towards them. Madame
Las Cases, on her return to Paris, received from old friends a great
deal of advice, and many offers on my account. They pressed forward in
the most obliging manner to offer their services and their influence;
but she has constantly answered that in reality I wanted no
assistance, and it was not my intention moreover to put the kindness
of any one to the test; that I had voluntarily banished myself for a
holy and religious ministry; and in fact I shall no more have a
country, Monsieur Grand Marshal, as long as you shall be where you
are, and there shall remain a single chance that my efforts, my
devotion, and my zeal, may be able to afford you any useful or
agreeable consolation—until then I shall be a wanderer in the world. I
shall carry about every where, if it must be, my atmosphere of sorrow
and zeal. On your part, keep me in your remembrance; give me the
consolation of imagining that our thoughts cross each other, and
sometimes are interchanged. Patience and courage are the virtues of
heroes. Who knows better than I that they belong to you all? Adieu—I
embrace you.

                                                 COUNT DE LAS CASES.

              FIFTH LETTER FROM COUNT LAS CASES TO GENERAL
                            COUNT BERTRAND.

                             _Frankfort on the Maine, 15th May, 1818._

I would write to you this day, my dear Bertrand, merely to be punctual
and faithful to the date which I have invariably prescribed to myself,
every month, for giving news of me. No change having taken place in my
situation, I could only repeat, word for word, the matter contained in
my last. I hoped to have been able to send you my letter from another
place; but a severe complaint in my eyes, which has come to aggravate
my other afflictions, has hitherto prevented me from setting out for
some of the warm baths in the south of Germany, to which I shall
repair, however, in a few days.

I have the satisfaction to learn that my preceding letters have been
regularly despatched to you, and that a great many pamphlets have been
sent off. I wish they may amuse you. Unfortunately I provide for you a
little in the dark;—the circumstances of locality will be my excuse; I
do my best; I am in a bad situation for that. Such a case as mine
would require a capital.—I am not permitted to reside in London; and
in Paris I could not accomplish my purpose. The same distance prevents
me from thinking of sending you a great many little things with which
I might employ myself if I were upon the spot. I had thought of
completing for you a little chemical apparatus, but renounced it. I
understand that it would be useless to you.

All the relatives of the Emperor are well, and await with impatience
the regular course of your letters, of which they entertain no doubt,
as you will have received my first, with my invariable resolution to
send you theirs every month punctually.—My wife will rejoin me in a
few days, to part no more, I hope.

Adieu, accept my wishes.

                                                      COUNT LAS CASES.

              LETTER FROM COUNT LAS CASES TO MR. GOULBURN,
                    ENCLOSING TO HIM THE PRECEDING.

                             _Frankfort on the Maine, 19th May, 1818._

I have the honour to thank you for the kindness with which you have
been pleased to inform me of the departure of my letters for St.
Helena, as also of that of the pamphlets and journals with which you
have been pleased to accompany them.

I am sorry you should have found it necessary to preserve silence,
upon certain points in my last letter. My discretion will know how to
interpret that silence. I owe it to the personal kindness which you
have hitherto shewn me, not to return to the subject any more. I have
written to the Cardinal Fesch, agreeably to a passage in your letter,
that he may send, by the way he shall think most proper, the sequel of
the Moniteur, reckoning from 1808, addressed to the office of Lord
Bathurst in London; and that his Lordship allows their transmission to
St. Helena.

As to the passage of your letter, Sir, concerning the request which I
had the honour to make to you, for a regular bulletin of the health of
Napoleon, in the name, and on the behalf of the members of his family,
may I be permitted to pray you will observe to my Lord Bathurst that
the whole of the family of the Emperor are not at Rome; that he has
one sister and her family at Frankfort; a brother and his family in
Austria; two other sisters and their families in the vicinity of
Vienna and Trieste; without reckoning others, all of whom would esteem
it the greatest favour, and would consider it a real gratification to
their heart, should the sentiments which induced Lord Bathurst to send
regular accounts to Rome, induce him condescendingly to allow of their
being regularly transmitted to them also. I was not ignorant of the
gratification which had been hitherto procured for the Princess
Borghese; but it did not extend from Rome to all the members of the
family in Germany, where the route was then much more circuitous than
that which I had the honour to request. Whatsoever title and right my
heart might give me, perhaps, to solicit for myself a participation in
this bulletin, I shall learn to renounce entirely and put myself
completely aside; and not doubting but that the favour will be more
highly appreciated by those for whom I solicit it, if it should come
directly from Lord Bathurst, rather than pass through my hands, I
shall solicit therefore anew, and in the name of the Countess of
Survilliers (the Princess Joseph Bonaparte), who resides in this city,
that he will have the goodness to send to her regularly the same
accounts which he has the goodness to address to the Princess Borghese
at Rome. The Countess of Survilliers will undertake to communicate
them to all the family in Germany.

Sir, I have learned, from the public journals, the unexpected return
of General Gourgaud. This sensible diminution of the household of
Napoleon, this new privation of one servant more, penetrates my heart,
and has determined me to pray that you will please to request of Lord
Bathurst to allow me to return to St. Helena, accompanied by my
family. This intention and this desire will never forsake me, as his
Lordship may convince himself by the whole of my correspondence with
Sir Hudson Lowe, from the moment of my quitting the colony. I do not
think it would be necessary to demand the previous consent of the
Emperor Napoleon to this request, because I dare flatter myself that
his answer would not be doubtful. However, if Lord Bathurst should
deem it necessary, I entreat his Lordship to make the application
himself: he will see that in my letter to Longwood I have abstained
from mentioning this circumstance. Considerations of delicacy, which
his Lordship will know how to appreciate, have restrained me. The
deplorable state of my health will be no obstacle. I am ambitious to
go and find a grave at the feet of him whom I venerate, and to whose
cares I shall find it sweet to consecrate my latest breath.

Accept, Sir, the expressions of the perfect consideration, &c.

                                                      COUNT LAS CASES.

I lost not a moment, on the receipt of the documents sent by Count
Bertrand, in despatching a copy of them to each of the Sovereigns at
Aix-la-Chapelle. I took this opportunity to renew my entreaties. I
implored them to succour the illustrious victim. “A few days more,”
said I, “and it will be too late.” The physician whom they had
snatched away from him (an Englishman,) declared publicly in London
that a much longer residence upon that unwholesome rock would cause
his death. I ventured to represent to them that their humanity, the
sentiments of their hearts, might be arrested perhaps by formal
denials, but would not their justice listen to the other side of the
question? I demanded that I might be allowed to furnish them with it,
I solicited the sole favour of being heard in behalf of this sacred
cause; “consenting,” I said, “if I did not prove the truth of the
documents laid at their feet, that my shame and my blood should
expiate my offence in having dared to impose upon them.”—At the same
time I did not lose one opportunity, one instant, one thought, which
might have multiplied the chances of any success. I addressed myself
to every one, who, I learned, had any influence over the hearts of the
Monarchs. I wrote particularly to M. de la Harpe, the tutor of the
Emperor Alexander, so well known, so venerated, who, I had been told,
was at that moment with him at Aix-la-Chapelle.

Neither upon this occasion, nor any other, have I ever had the
slightest answer to any one of my letters; and if any thing has been
sometimes insinuated to me indirectly and with mystery, I was obliged
to suspect it as a snare laid against my person, which was of small
moment; or against my cause, which was every thing to me. Thus the
Congress ended, and not a word escaped from it in favour of Napoleon.
In fine, I sought to stimulate even foreign talents; and in the number
of voices then raised, the pamphlet of a certain German journalist
attracted sufficient attention to serve for a pretext to devise
trammels for the liberty of the press.

However, all the efforts which I had called forth were vain, all my
hopes were blasted, all my pains were thrown away—they left him to
die! In fact, what could the naked Truth avail with sovereigns,
without the protection of any address, or the alliance of any
interests, against the insinuations of wicked men, who watched with
all the ardour of political fanaticism, private resentment, and
prospective apprehensions! They acted so effectually that in the
council of kings, fear, no doubt, prevailed over generosity. They
demonstrated how dangerous universal interest rendered the victim: and
it may be truly said, to the glory of generous sentiments, that public
opinion was pronounced every where with great warmth; not less in
Germany, than in any other country. And perhaps, in the sight of the
high personages who were witnesses of it, this favourable opinion did
a great deal of mischief to him whom it meant to serve; as if it had
been in the destiny of Napoleon that the interest of the Germans
should become as baneful to him in adversity, as their animosity had
been fatal to him in the time of his power.—Amongst the efforts to
maintain the hideous captivity of Napoleon, there has been actually
imputed to the English Ministers a base intrigue, an unworthy
deception. It was said that, to confirm the wavering Sovereigns, they
had forged, for the express purpose, a pretended plot of escape. The
imputation was founded upon the timeliness, the éclat, and publicity,
with which the arrival of the Musquito brig suddenly caused this news
to spread through all Europe; a circumstance, which, after it had once
produced the intended effect, that of counterbalancing the public
favour, gave room to no further mention, to no detail, to no
confirmation whatsoever; an imaginary conjecture, no doubt, and in
which the English Ministers are probably culpable, only in having
afforded ground for suspecting them of it by the numerous antecedent
cases, in which they degraded themselves in acting against Napoleon.

To my chagrin was added the fear of seeing old persecutions revived
against me, in my peaceful solitude. The spring of 1819 was
approaching. The excellent Grand Duke of Baden was just dead. Those
who did not like us became stronger by this event, and it was
signified to me, without the knowledge of the new sovereign perhaps,
that I must quit the States of Baden. The order was given to me only
verbally, and I was even informed that I should receive it in no other
way. The motive for my removal, it was said, was the desire to live in
close friendship with France, and the fear that my stay would be
disagreeable to her; a motive that must excite a smile of pity. I
disdained to say that the French Minister had thought fit to leave me
in repose; the intolerance of opinion had discovered another motive to
the full as ridiculous. The person charged with the order against me
was very willing to grant me some days for preparation, but I was
nearly like the Greek philosopher, who carried his all upon his own
person; and I would have set out at the very instant of the
notification itself, if Madame Las Cases had not been afflicted with
an inflammation of the lungs which placed her in great danger. I
assured him that I should only allow myself time to see her out of
danger; and although the well-meant advice was given me to solicit
Government for permission to remain, I still disdained it; and a few
days afterwards, I set out on my route for Offenbach, where Madame Las
Cases was to join me, when she should be in a state to travel.

If I felt myself so much hurt by this unexpected treatment, it is
because I had already forgotten all the vexations with which I had
been overwhelmed by the English authorities, and for more than a year,
during which I lived upon the German soil, I was not subjected to such
forms; but, on the contrary, I was spoiled by the favour, the
interest, the respect, of which I every where saw myself the object,
even among those of a contrary opinion; and, besides, on leaving
Manheim, I was far from being embarrassed for a new residence. Some
friends, in their kind precautions, had sounded some neighbouring
governments; I was assured of a favourable reception in several. One
of the princes, addressed upon the occasion, answered, with a smile,
“Yes, no doubt; he should be well received and well treated. So far
from repulsing a man of this character, a prince who understands his
own interest should have his courtiers inoculated from him.”

However, in expatiating here so freely upon my successes, I must not
disguise my disappointments. Now and then I had also my little
mortifications. All was not roses: and, without reckoning the
expulsion from Manheim, for example, of which I was speaking, they
found great fault, in another place, with the respect shewn to me,
being, they said, one of those wretches who had arrested the King of
France at Varennes; and who more lately had done, perhaps, still
worse. In another place, a Baron who gave a grand evening party,
informed his guests that he had at length ascertained who this Count
and Councillor of Napoleon’s was whose arrival had made so great a
noise in the city. He was, he informed them, nothing but his cook from
St. Helena; and that, not having means to pay him his wages at
parting, he had, as a compensation, created him a Count and Councillor
of State. If the Baron believed what he said, he was assuredly a good
easy man, and if his object was only to make his guests believe it, he
must have taken them for great simpletons. The pleasant part of the
story remains, for we must tell the whole; and it is that, in fact,
the cook from Longwood had passed through a few days before: and thus
it appears how anecdotes and the biographies of the saloon are
engendered and multiply; and the devil himself cannot afterwards
eradicate them. I could smile at the wickedness or the stupidity.
Their acts and their words were only ridiculous and grotesque; but a
circumstance of an important nature presented itself, which would have
distressed me excessively, if I did not know how much the mass of
error which presses round sovereigns may impair the soundness of their
judgment.

I was assured that some one at the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle,
finding himself disposed, in the presence of the Emperor Alexander, to
touch upon the frightful situation of Napoleon, and citing the
authentic statements produced by me in his support, that Prince
answered, “We must not believe all that this man is come to tell us in
Europe; he is an intriguer.” How is it that the most enlightened
princes are deceived; even those from whom we should expect better?
Unless it was here, as with Napoleon, who often used peevish
expressions, after his own manner, and not implying harm; and besides,
by good fortune, I have still on my side, time, that true crucible of
characters. Years have since elapsed, and the unanimous opinion, I
dare hope, of all those who have known or followed me, would
sufficiently clear me from such an accusation. “An intriguer!” I, who
have worn out upon a rock all the vanities of this world! I, who in
the clouds of Longwood, have seen all things from so great a height,
that they remain small indeed to my eyes! I, who of all people on
earth, know nothing to desire! I, in fine, who, no longer considering
myself of this world, cannot have, and have not in fact, any other
ambition whatever, any other wish, than that of Diogenes—“that they
would not stand between me and the sun.”

                                -------




                  FROM MY ARRIVAL AT OFFENBACH, UP TO
                          MY RETURN TO FRANCE.

                                -------

                   A Space of more than Two Years.

                                -------


RESIDENCE AT OFFENBACH.—DETAIL.—ARRIVAL OF MADAME MONTHOLON
  IN EUROPE.—JOURNEY TO BRUSSELS.—RESIDENCE AT LIEGE, AT
  CHAUDE-FONTAINE, AT SOHAN, NEAR SPA, AT ANTWERP, AT MALINES.—DEATH
  OF NAPOLEON.—RETURN TO FRANCE.—CONCLUSION.

Offenbach is a handsome little town in the Grand-Duchy of Darmstadt,
situate upon the Maine, two leagues from Frankfort. I settled myself
there, according to my custom, in a sort of little hermitage. It was
upon the bank of the river, within a step of the town.

My head-aches, under their different symptoms, had never quitted me.
At Manheim I suffered very acute pains. A short time after my arrival
at Offenbach, my illness suddenly assumed a character new,
insupportable, and alarming. It was then that a universal
indisposition, an increasing debility, commenced, which, preventing
the employment of the faculties, brought with them a complete disgust
of life; then also commenced that sudden trembling in my limbs and in
my whole frame: those sudden visits of dimness of sight, which I might
call the twinkling of existence. How often in this state, and without
taking any notice of it, have I gone to bed with the thought, I had
almost said the hope, of awaking no more. Madame Las Cases, in the
excess of her anxiety, wished that I should give up every kind of
occupation whatever, of which, in fact, I was absolutely incapable;
she suppressed my letters, and wrote to the relatives of the Emperor,
to apprize them of my real situation, and to prevail upon them to
appoint a successor to me in the cares which I had created for myself.
For a long time past, as a precaution, I myself had entreated them to
join with me a person whose happiness it would have constituted, and
the choice of whom would have been agreeable to the Emperor.[44] He
was then with one of them; but, from one cause or another, this was
not done, and necessity compelled me to break off without any
provision having been made to supply the deficiency. I exhausted in
vain all the aid of medicine; and, if the domestic cares, the tender
solicitude, which surrounded me on every side, could have availed, my
illness would have been only a blessing, from the pleasure of seeing
them lavished upon me. One loves to dwell upon that which was sweet,
and I could not assuredly better describe the great interest felt for
me, and the nature of the recompense which the sentiments I had shewn,
the efforts I had made, had obtained for me, than when I say my little
hermitage has been honoured with the presence of three Queens, and, I
think, on the same day. Two of them, it is true, had been deposed; but
they did not the less command every where at that moment, by the
elevation of their minds, the simplicity of their manners, the _éclat_
of their other qualities, a universal respect, at least, as much as at
the era of their greatest splendour.

Footnote 44:

  Colonel Planat, who had accompanied us as far as Plymouth, and who
  had lately obtained leave to repair to St. Helena himself.

It was at Offenbach that the little colony, which Cardinal Fesch sent
to St. Helena, was addressed to me on its way to that place. It
consisted of a chaplain, a surgeon, a physician, and a valet de
chambre; all chosen by the Cardinal. On my arrival in Europe, I had
written to him, to be assured that to send a priest, capable also of
writing to dictation, and of assisting a little in business, would be
very agreeable to the Emperor; and I had employed his mediation to
interest, for that purpose, the conscience of the Holy Father, who, in
fact, demanded it of the English Ministers, who had hitherto opposed
the measure, or attached to it inadmissible conditions. It was also
from Offenbach, that I despatched to Longwood two charming portraits:
one, the young Napoleon, painted from the life in the same year, and
sent by King Jerome; the other that of the Empress Josephine, by Sain,
a present from the Queen Hortense. It was mounted in a magnificent
tea-caddy, of crystal. This choice of crystal was a delicate
precaution of the Queen’s, who also had the mounting executed in such
a manner as to render it impossible to suspect any concealed writing.
The former of these two portraits reached its destination. The valet
de chambre of the Emperor has since told me, that Napoleon, on
perceiving it, seized it with avidity and kissed it. I, who know how
reserved the Emperor was, can judge from this circumstance the whole
extent of his joy and satisfaction. As to the portrait of the Empress
Josephine, it never arrived at Longwood, although, by a singular
contrariety, it was found, in consequence of some memorandum, to have
paid the custom-house duty on its importation into England.

Towards the end of the summer, Madame Las Cases, by order of the
physicians, carried me to the waters of Schwalbach, where I was an
object of pity to every one. I returned without having derived any
benefit from them; but a circumstance then revived my strength for an
instant, and caused me to quit Germany.

All of a sudden, I learnt from the public papers the return of Madame
Montholon to Europe; she had been, like myself, repulsed from England,
and landed at Ostend. I was not able to resist going to seek authentic
details, of which I had so long been deprived. I hastened to rejoin
her, whether she should be permitted to stay in the country, or should
be forced, after my example, to run up and down the highways, for in
that case I should be useful to her; I had had experience.

Travelling with mystery, for I remembered too well all the ill
treatment I formerly received in the Netherlands, I joined the
Countess of Montholon at Brussels. Not only was she at liberty to
reside there, but she had been received with the most particular
respect; and a journal of the place having announced that she would be
obliged to continue her route, a semi-official article refuted this
news, upon this ground, especially, that the Netherlands was the _land
of hospitality_. I wanted no more; Belgium appeared to me nearly as
France; in the midst of the Belgians, I should think myself among my
countrymen. I wrote, therefore, to Madame Las Cases to acquaint her
with our good fortune, and desiring that she might hasten to come and
join me. Shunning Brussels, for the same reasons which had made me
leave Frankfort, I chose Liege; remembering the kind reception which I
had there experienced, at the time of my unfortunate passage, eighteen
months before; and I settled there, not without apprehension of some
new ill luck. But I was wrong; for I must with truth and gratitude say
that, during nearly two years and a half that I have since traversed
the country in all directions, without any request, any solicitation,
not even a previous announcement, that country, formerly so baneful to
me, has ever since been the land of hospitality; never having
afterwards had occasion to perceive any authority whatever, otherwise
than by the tranquillity, the repose, which I enjoyed under its shade.

Influence and foreign malice had ceased; it was at this time that my
son requested leave, anew, and on his own account, to return to
Longwood. I have the answer of Lord Bathurst, who refused it.
Subsequently, the Princess Pauline, who succeeded in obtaining leave
to repair thither, wrote to me to know if my son wished to accompany
her: but then, alas! it was too late.

Neither the affection nor the care of my friends at Liege, where I
remained the whole winter; nor the rural situation of Chaude-Fontaine,
where I spent the spring; nor the generous hospitality of the worthy
and excellent proprietor of that charming spot Justlanville, who
forced me to accept for the summer, at a few steps from him, the
residence called Johan, at the gates of Spa and of Verviers; nor the
benevolence of all his family, so numerous, so kind, so respected in
the country; were able to ameliorate my condition, or fix my stay. Yet
it would be difficult for me to describe, as they deserve, the extreme
kindness, the touching dispositions, the sympathetic spirit, of the
whole population of these countries, so prosperous, so rich, so
flourishing, under the imperial reign, and which continues so
grateful.

I spent my second winter at Antwerp, with some sincere friends whom I
tenderly love, and whom my arrival on the expedition to Flushing, ten
years before, had procured for me; and in the spring I reached
Malines, without any particular motive; for I was not able to remain a
long time in the same place. I stood in need of change. I was the
patient who tosses and turns in his bed, seeking in vain the sweets of
sleep. Twice, during the two years in Belgium, Madame Las Cases wished
to take me to the south; and twice, at the very moment of setting out,
imperative circumstances happened to stop us:—disappointments,
however, which were to us so many real favours of fortune. But for the
first of them, we should have found ourselves advanced a day’s journey
within the frontier, at the very moment of a fatal and sanguinary
catastrophe; and, but for the second, we should have arrived at Nice
precisely at the moment of the constitutional explosion in Piedmont;
and no doubt that, in both cases, and naturally enough, we should have
been subjected to at least temporary inconvenience.

Meanwhile the Congress of Laybach was held, and I could not refrain
from attempting new solicitations. I addressed a new letter to each of
the three high Sovereigns. The following is that to the Emperor
Alexander:—

“SIRE,—A new and solemn occasion presents itself for preferring to
your Majesty my humble and respectful accents. I seize it anew with
eagerness.

“I am not afraid of rendering myself importunate: my excuse and my
pardon are in the generosity of your soul.

“Sire, to recal, at this moment, to your recollection, and to that of
your high Allies, the august captive, whom you, a long time, called
your brother and your friend; to seek to divert your thoughts and
theirs to that victim whose cruel suffering is always present to me;
this is, I know it, to make the knell of death heard amidst joy and
feasting. But therein, Sire, I trust that, even in the eyes of your
Majesty, I fulfil an honourable and pious duty, the performance of
which must remain always sweet to me, however perilous it may be!

“Sire,—reduced to a state of infirmity and weakness which leaves me
scarcely able to connect a few ideas, I follow the instinct of my
heart in default of the faculties of my head, in merely repeating
literally here to your Majesty the note which I presumed to address to
you at Aix-la-Chapelle; for, the circumstances having remained the
same, no change having since taken place in that respect, what could I
do better than to place under the eyes of your Majesty the same
picture, the same facts, the same reasoning, the same truths.

“Only if, in spite of that which I then thought was certain, the
illustrious victim, contrary to my expectation and that of the
faculty, still breathes; if he has not yet fallen, I shall dare to
observe to your Majesty that this unexpected prolongation of his life,
which has been to him only a continuation of torment, is perhaps, to
your Majesty, a blessing from heaven, which Providence reserves for
your heart and for your memory.... Ah! Sire, there is then time
still!... But the precious opportunity may every moment escape from
_all your power_!... And what would be then the tardy, impotent
regrets which could neither appease your heart, nor restore to your
memory an act magnanimous, generous—a glory of a nature the most
soothing, the most moral, the most commendable in the eyes of
posterity, the best understood, perhaps, with which you could have
embellished your glorious life? I mean oblivion of injuries, disdain
of vengeance, remembrance of old friendship; in fine, the respect due
to royal majesty—to _one of the Lord’s anointed_!!!

“Sire,—since my return to Europe, separated from the society of men, a
prey to hopeless sufferings originating in St. Helena itself,
belonging for the future and unalterably much more to another life
than to this, I ardently raise every day in my retreat my hands to the
Almighty, praying that he will deign to touch the heart of your
Majesty, and to enlighten it upon so essential a part of its interests
and its glory.

                                                  “I am, &c.

                                           “COUNT DE LAS CASES.”[45]

Footnote 45:

  A similar letter was addressed to the other Allied Sovereigns, with
  slight appropriate alterations.

How prophetic were many of these lines! Alas, they were scarcely
before the eyes of the monarchs when he was no more!—He had ceased to
live, to suffer!—On opening the Moniteur, I found there the fatal
announcement. Though it could not surprise me, having been a long time
certain to my understanding, I was not the less struck, overcome as at
an unexpected event that was never to happen.

The next day I received a melancholy letter from London with
circumstantial details, and conjectures for which these details might
furnish matter; and this letter concluded by saying, “It was on the
fifth of May, at six o’clock in the evening, at the very instant when
the gun was firing at sunset, that his great soul quitted the earth.”

How strange the coincidences that sometimes happen!—When about the
person of Napoleon, and under his influence, I had contracted the
habit of keeping a diary, and he frequently expressed his regret that
he had not done the same. “A line to assist the memory,” said he,
“merely two or three indicatory words.” I had continued this practice
ever since; and, as it may easily be imagined, I hastened to turn to
the fifth of May, to see where I was, what I had been doing, and what
had happened to me at that fatal moment. And what should I
find?—_Sudden storm; shelter under a shed; awful clap of thunder._
Taking a ride, towards evening, in the country beyond Malines, the
weather being delightful, there came on suddenly one of those summer
storms, of such violence that I was obliged to seek shelter on
horseback beneath a shed; and while in this situation there was a
thunder-clap so tremendous that it seemed to be close to me. Alas! and
what was passing elsewhere, at such a distance, at the same
moment!—The circumstance may perhaps appear more than strange, but no
doubt there are at Malines, or in its environs, naturalists or
meteorologists who keep an account of the weather: it is for them to
confirm or to contradict my statement.

[Illustration:

  THE DEATH OF NAPOLEON.

  London: Published for Henry Colburn, March, 1836.
]

On the report of the death of Napoleon, it must, however, be said,
that there was but one single cry, one selfsame sentiment in the
streets, in the shops, in the public places; even the saloons shewed
some feeling: the cabinets alone shewed themselves insensible, worse
than insensible! But, after all, it was natural, they breathed, at
length, at their ease....

During his life, in the time of his power, he had been assailed with
pamphlets and libels; on his death, we were suddenly inundated with
productions in his praise—a contrast, nevertheless, that gives a
little relief from so much meanness of the human heart. There were
every where, and from all parts, compositions in prose and in verse,
paintings, portraits, pictures, lithographs, and a thousand little
things more or less ingenious, proving much better than all the pomp
of kings could do the sincerity, the extent, the vivacity of the
sentiments which he left behind him. A clergyman on the banks of the
Rhine, the place of whose residence had received some particular
favour from the Emperor, assembled his parishioners, and made them
pray for their old benefactor. In a large city of Belgium, a great
number of citizens subscribed for a solemn funeral service, and if
they abstained from the performance of it, it was much more from
etiquette than in consequence of any interdict. Then these words of
Napoleon, which I have often heard him repeat, were verified:—“In the
course of time, nothing will be thought so fine, or strike the
attention so much, as the doing of justice to me.... I shall gain
ground every day in the minds of the people. My name will become the
star of their rights; it will be the expression of their regrets.” And
all these circumstances are verified in every country and every where.
Without reckoning things of this kind, of which I am no doubt unaware,
a peer of Great Britain shortly after said in open Parliament, “That
the very persons who detested this great man have acknowledged that
for ten centuries there had not appeared upon earth a more
extraordinary character. All Europe,” added he, “has worn mourning for
the hero; and those who have contributed to that great sacrifice are
devoted to the execrations of the present generation as well as to
those of posterity.”[46]

Footnote 46:

  Speech of Lord Holland. _Pilot_ of the 3rd of August, 1822.

Two German professors, who either had always known his real character,
or had been cured of their national prejudices, have erected upon
their grounds a monument to his memory, with some inscriptions,
indicating that, with him, fell a funereal veil over the rights of the
people, and the ascendant impulse of civilization.

Our writers have defended his memory, our poets have celebrated it,
and our orators, in the legislative tribunal, have proclaimed aloud
the attachment which they had felt for him, or that they are honoured
by the distinctions which they had received from him.

Nothing now remained for me but to return to my country. In crossing
the frontier, at the end of the second emigration, I could not avoid
thinking of the circumstances of my return after the first, and what a
difference of sentiment distinguished them! Then I seemed, at every
step, to advance amidst a hostile population; now I felt as if I was
entering into my family. I soon beheld again all my companions of
Longwood, and, while embracing them, I could not deny myself one
melancholy reflection—we were all met again; but he for whom we had
sought the fatal rock, he alone remained there! I recollected that he
had told us it would be so, and many other things besides. I learned
from all these eye-witnesses the details and the circumstances of the
ill treatment which, since my departure, had been daily increasing;
and I saw that the times which I had known had not even been the most
unhappy moments.

[Illustration:

  STATUE OF NAPOLEON
  ON THE COLUMN OF THE PLACE VENDÔME.

  London: Published for HENRY COLBURN, December, 1835.
]

I read his last will; I there found my name, three or four times, in
his own hand!—What were my emotions!—Assuredly I did not stand in need
of them for my reward. For a long time I have carried it within my
breast. But the remembrances, however, were dear and precious—how much
more precious than millions! And yet he joined to them large sums from
those of his family who were most nearly connected with him, and were
dearest to him. If they ever pay them, so much the better; that will
concern them hereafter more than me. I should have liked to consider
myself only as a kind of depository. I even wished to anticipate them,
but I found it necessary to stop: my means did not allow me to make
these advances. My happiness would have been great in affording a
retirement to a few civil and military veterans. In our long evenings,
we should have often spoken of his battles or discoursed of his heart.

At last I received (thanks to the zealous interposition of one of the
most distinguished characters of the English peerage!) the papers
which had been detained from me at St. Helena: and which, in spite of
all the power of the laws, I no longer reckoned upon. In the situation
in which I found myself, with the sentiments with which it had
inspired me, I felt myself under the indispensible obligation to
assist, since I had some means to do it, in making better known him
who had been so much misrepresented; and, in spite of my infirmity, I
set about this work. Heaven has blessed my efforts in permitting me to
reach the end, and to finish it, however ill; this I have the
happiness to do at this instant. If I have succeeded in reconciling
hearts, if I have destroyed prejudices, conquered prepossessions, I
have obtained my dearest, my sweetest object; my mission is
accomplished.

_Passy, August 15, 1823._




                              POSTSCRIPT.

I have to reproach myself for not having taken an opportunity to
relate the adventures of Santini. At the conclusion of every drama,
whatever may be its nature, one likes to meet again in the
_dénouement_ with all those who have figured in the early part of it.
Santini’s story involves moreover traits of manners, tints of the
times, a reference to public affairs, which induce me to repair my
omission, since I have it in my power to do so.

We had long given up Santini for lost, confined, dead, when all at
once he again made his appearance among us soon after the death of
Napoleon: and the following narrative is from his own lips, and nearly
in his own words.

After making his escape from England, he had traversed Belgium and
some parts of Germany, with the intelligence and address of a clever
Italian. At length, on entering Münich, he imagined that he had
overcome the grand obstacles, and was safe in port. But precisely in
that city he was apprehended, and, in spite of all his applications to
the different authorities, and to several ambassadors, in order to
obtain permission to pass quietly, he was carried back by gendarmes
into Wirtemberg, which he traversed at liberty, but under evident
_surveillance_. On reaching Lombardy, at Como, he went to declare
himself to the police: they had been expecting him there; he was
arrested and conveyed to Milan, where he was told that he could not
remain in the country, at full liberty, without serious inconvenience;
and that, in consequence, he should be conducted to Mantua, where he
would be under less restraint. Now the less restraint that was
promised him proved to be nothing better or worse than a prison, where
he was not allowed to hold communication with any person whatsoever.
Such was the importance attached to his complete seclusion that, Maria
Louisa having passed through that city, and stopped there for
twenty-four or thirty-six hours, poor Santini had for an extraordinary
companion in his room a police officer who did not suffer him to be
for a moment out of his sight, not even during meals or when he slept;
which serves to show the extreme care that was taken to prevent all
communication between Napoleon and Maria Louisa.

At length, in consequence of the disturbance and complaints which he
made in his dungeon, an order arrived to remove him to Vienna; but the
captain of the circle was required to travel in the same carriage with
him, and to conduct him by forced journeys to his new destination.

Santini, contrary to his expectation, found himself again imprisoned,
and again made a great noise; incessantly insisting on being tried,
and either shot, as he said, if he deserved it, or set at liberty if
he had not done any thing wrong. He was at last told that they had
nothing to lay to his charge, but that his entire liberty was attended
with great difficulties; that he could not be suffered to go into
every country, and he should therefore have his choice between England
and Austria. Santini replied that he would never more set foot on land
governed by the executioners of his master. He was then carried to
Brünn, the capital of Moravia, where he was obliged to take an oath to
abstain from seeking any foreign correspondence. On his arrival there,
he found himself, it is true, under a special _surveillance_; but
there, said Santini, ended his persecutions and his troubles; there
began a better condition. His captivity indeed became, he said, a
blessing, and his heart was filled with gratitude. He there found
himself an object of attention and interest: all, from the highest to
the lowest, showed him the greatest kindness. The inhabitants had
twice seen Napoleon; as an enemy it is true, and yet they felt
profound veneration for him. In this manner Santini spent, what he
called, three happy years.

It had been recommended by superior authority that a strict watch
should be kept, at Brünn in particular, to prevent Santini from
sending off any paper for the Emperor Francis. When that monarch was
going to the Congress at Troppau, he stopped at Brünn, and Santini
said that two days before, a police officer had arrived from Vienna to
watch lest he should address any thing to the Emperor. Thus the heart
of Francis was under as vigilant _surveillance_ as that of Maria
Louisa; the emotions of both were suspicious, and of course they were
much feared. All precautions, however, were vain. Santini had
interested the highest personages, and a petition from him, on the
treatment that he had experienced, reached the hands of the Sovereign.
He complained in it of his pecuniary situation, and of the privation
of liberty, and accompanied it with attestations which he had brought
from St. Helena, especially the order for the pension which Napoleon
had assigned to him. The Emperor Francis appeared to be much struck
with this order, which was signed by the Grand Marshal, and headed
“_By express order of the Emperor._” It purported that a pension of a
certain amount was granted to Santini, and that it should be paid him
by the first relatives or the first friends of the Emperor’s to whom
he should present it. “Is it not terrible?” said the Emperor Francis,
looking at it—“he is prisoner at St. Helena, and yet he continues to
give orders as if nothing had happened!” His beneficence, however, got
the better of his surprise, and whether he considered himself as a
relative, or merely followed the impulse of his kind heart, he ordered
a sum of money to be remitted to Santini; and it is a singular
circumstance, which I could not observe without a kind of emotion,
that the first two sums set down on the order for Santini’s pension,
are placed precisely against names not related to the Emperor by
blood—the Princess Stephanie of Baden and the Emperor of Austria, the
one his adopted daughter, the other his father-in-law.




                              SUPPLEMENT.

                                -------

[It has been judged desirable to subjoin a few extracts from the
celebrated Work by Dr. Antommarchi, Napoleon’s Physician, as
furnishing, in their details of the latter moments, death, and
interment of the fallen Ruler, a natural sequel to the account of what
may be called his _penultimate_ days, by the faithful Las Cases.]

                                -------


                     NAPOLEON’S RELIGIOUS NOTIONS.

At half-past one he sent for Vignali.—“Abbé,” said he, “do you know
what a _chambre-ardente_[47] is?”—“Yes, Sire.”—“Have you ever
officiated in one?”—“Never, Sire.”—“Well, you shall officiate in
mine.”—He then entered into the most minute detail on that subject,
and gave the priest his instructions, at considerable length. His face
was animated and convulsive, and I was following with uneasiness the
contraction of his features, when he observed in mine I know not what
expression which displeased him.—“You are above those weaknesses,”
said he, “but what is to be done? I am neither a philosopher nor a
physician. I believe in God, and am of the religion of my father. It
is not every body who _can_ be an Atheist.” Then turning again to the
priest—“I was born a Catholic, and will fulfil the duties prescribed
by the Catholic religion, and receive the assistance it administers.
You will say mass every day in the chapel, and will expose the holy
sacrament during forty hours. After my death, you will place your
altar at my head in the room in which I shall lie in state; you will
continue to say mass, and perform all the customary ceremonies, and
will not cease to do so until I am under ground.”

Footnote 47:

  A room in which dead bodies lie in state.

The Abbé withdrew, and I remained alone with Napoleon, who censured my
supposed incredulity. “How can you carry it so far?” said he. “Can you
not believe in God, whose existence every thing proclaims, and in whom
the greatest minds have believed?”—“But, Sire, I have never doubted
it. I was following the pulsations of the fever, and your Majesty
thought you perceived in my features an expression which they had
not.”—“You are a physician,” replied he laughing, and then added, in
an under-tone, “Those people have only to do with matter; they never
will believe any thing.”

                   HIS WISHES AS TO HIS BURIAL PLACE.

Napoleon was free from vomiting, and drank a great deal of cold water.
“If fate had decreed that I should recover, I would erect a monument
on the spot where the water flows, and would crown the fountain in
testimony of the relief it has afforded me. If I die, and my body,
proscribed as my person has been, should be denied a little earth, I
desire that my remains may be deposited in the cathedral of Ajaccio in
Corsica; and if it should not be permitted to me to rest where I was
born, let me be buried near the limpid stream of this pure water.”

                    HIS ADVICE TO THOSE AROUND HIM.

Napoleon still preserved his presence of mind, and recommended to his
executors, in case he should lose it, not to allow any other English
physicians to approach him than Doctor Arnott. “I am going to die,”
said he; “and you to return to Europe: I must give you some advice as
to the line of conduct you are to pursue. You have shared my exile;
you will be faithful to my memory, and will not do any thing that may
injure it. I have sanctioned all principles, and infused them into my
laws and acts; I have not omitted a single one. Unfortunately,
however, the circumstances in which I was placed were arduous, and I
was obliged to act with severity, and to postpone the execution of my
plans. Our reverses occurred: I could not unbend the bow; and France
has been deprived of the liberal institutions I intended to give her.
She judges me with indulgence: she feels grateful for my intentions:
she cherishes my name and my victories. Imitate her example; be
faithful to the opinions we have defended, and to the glory we have
acquired; any other course can only lead to shame and confusion.”

                               HIS DEATH.

Icy coldness of the lower extremities, and in a short time, of the
whole body—eye fixed—lips closed and contracted—violent agitation of
the nostrils—most complete adynamia[48]—pulse extremely weak and
intermittant, varying from one hundred and two to one hundred and
eight, one hundred and ten, and one hundred and twelve pulsations per
minute—breathing slow, intermittant, and stertorous—spasmodic
contraction of the epigastric region and of the stomach—deep
sighs—piteous moans—convulsive movements, which ended by a loud and
dismal shriek. I placed a blister on the chest, and one on each thigh;
applied two large sinapisms on the soles of the feet, and fomentations
on the abdomen, with a bottle filled with hot water: I also
endeavoured to refresh the Emperor’s lips and mouth by constantly
moistening them with a mixture of common water, orange-flower water,
and sugar; but the passage was spasmodically closed; nothing was
swallowed; all was in vain. The intermittent breathing and mournful
sound still continued, accompanied by a violent agitation, of the
abdominal muscles: the eyelids remained fixed, the eyes moved and fell
back under the upper lids; the pulse sunk and rallied again.—It was
eleven minutes before six o’clock—Napoleon was about to breathe his
last!—a slight froth covered his lips—he was no more!—Such is the end
of all human glory!

Footnote 48:

  Weakness.

                ARRANGEMENTS RESPECTING THE CORPSE, &C.

It had not been possible, for want of the necessary materials, to
embalm the body, the whiteness of which was really extraordinary. It
was deposited upon one of the small tent-beds, furnished with white
curtains as funeral hangings!!! The cloak of blue cloth which Napoleon
had worn at the battle of Marengo served to cover him. The feet and
hands were exposed to view; at his right side was his sword, and on
his chest a crucifix. At some distance from the body was the silver
vase in which I had been obliged to deposit his heart and stomach.
Behind his head was an altar, at which the priest, habited in his
surplice and stole, recited prayers. All the persons of his suite,
officers and servants, dressed in mourning, were standing on his left.
Doctor Arnott watched over the corpse, which had been placed under his
personal responsibility.

The door of the _chambre ardente_, and the approach to it, had been
for some hours past thronged by an immense crowd. The door was at last
opened; and the crowd entered, and gazed upon the lifeless remains,
without confusion, without tumult, and in a religious silence. The
order of admittance was regulated by Captain Crokat, the orderly
officer of Longwood. The officers and subalterns of the 20th and 66th
regiments were first admitted, and the remainder afterwards. All felt
that emotion which the spectacle of courage and misfortune united
never fails to excite in the hearts of all brave men.

The coffin which was to receive the Emperor having been brought, I was
obliged to place the heart and stomach in it. I had flattered myself
that I should be able to convey them to Europe; but all my entreaties
on that subject were fruitless: I experienced the grief and
mortification of a refusal. I left the first-mentioned of these two
organs in the vase in which it had at first been enclosed, and placed
the second in another vase of the same metal, and of a cylindrical
shape, which had been used to keep Napoleon’s sponge. I filled the
vase containing the heart with alcohol, closed it hermetically,
soldered it, and deposited it with the other at the angles of the
coffin, in which Napoleon was then laid. The body was first placed
upon a kind of mattress and pillow, in a tin-box lined with white
satin. The Emperor’s hat, which could not remain on his head for want
of room, was placed on his feet; eagles, some pieces of all the coins
bearing his effigy, his fork and spoon, his knife, a plate with his
arms, &c. were also put into that box, which was carefully soldered,
and placed in another of mahogany. A third, of lead, received these
two boxes; and the whole was finally enclosed in a fourth of mahogany,
which was closed, and secured with iron screws. The coffin was then
covered with the cloak Napoleon had worn at the battle of Marengo, and
exposed on the same spot where the body had lain. Arnott continued to
watch, and Vignali to pray; whilst the crowd, which increased every
hour, were allowed to circulate round these mournful objects.

                              THE FUNERAL.

The Governor himself soon arrived at Longwood, and was shortly
afterwards followed by the Admiral and all the civil and military
authorities. The weather was beautiful, the roads were crowded with
people, and the hills covered with musicians: never had so mournful
and solemn a spectacle been before exhibited in the island. At
half-past twelve the grenadiers took the coffin, which they could not
lift without difficulty, and, after repeated and persevering efforts,
succeeded in carrying it to and placing it on the hearse, which was
waiting in the great walk in the garden; and it was then covered with
a violet coloured velvet cloth, and the cloak which Napoleon wore at
Marengo. The Emperor’s household was in mourning; and the funeral
procession was arranged, and proceeded in the following order, which
had been regulated by the Governor himself:—

        Abbé Vignali, habited in the sacerdotal ornaments used
            for the celebration of mass, with young Henry
                 Bertrand, carrying a vase of silver
                      containing Holy-water and
                                 the
                            _Aspersorium_.
                      Doctor Arnott and myself.
       The persons appointed to take care of the hearse, which
             was drawn by four horses, led by grooms, and
                   escorted by twelve grenadiers on
                     each side, without arms.[49]

Footnote 49:

  They were to carry the coffin, when the bad state of the roads
  should prevent the hearse from advancing.

          Young Napoleon Bertrand and Marchand, both on foot
                     on each side of the hearse.
        Counts Bertrand and Montholon on horseback immediately
                          behind the hearse.
                     Part of the Emperor’s suite.
         Countess Bertrand, with her daughter Hortense, in a
              calash drawn by two horses led by servants
                    who walked on the side of the
                              precipice.
        The Emperor’s horse, led by his _piqueur_ Archambaud.
              The officers of the marines on foot and on
                              horseback.
               The officers of the staff on horseback.
        General Coffin and the Marquis Montchenu on horseback.
              The Admiral and the Governor on horseback.
                    The inhabitants of the Island.

The procession left Longwood in this order, passed before the
guard-house, and the garrison of the island, about two thousand five
hundred strong, which lined the whole of the left side of the road as
far as Hut’s Gate. Bands of music, stationed at intervals, added by
their mournful sounds to the solemn sadness of the ceremony. After the
procession had passed before the troops, they followed, and
accompanied it towards the place of burial. The dragoons marched
first, the 20th regiment of infantry followed; then came the marines,
the 66th regiment, the volunteers of St. Helena; and, lastly, the
regiment of royal artillery, with fifteen pieces of cannon. Lady Lowe
and her daughter were waiting on the road at Hut’s Gate, in a calash
drawn by two horses, and afterwards followed the procession at a
distance, accompanied by some servants in mourning. The fifteen pieces
of cannon were stationed along the road, and the men were near their
pieces ready to fire.

At about a quarter of a mile beyond Hut’s Gate the hearse stopped, and
the troops halted and ranged themselves in order of battle along the
road. The grenadiers then took the coffin on their shoulders, and
carried it thus to the grave, by the new road which had been made for
that purpose on the side of the mountain. Every body then dismounted;
the ladies got out of the calash, and the procession followed the
corpse without observing any order: Counts Bertrand and Montholon,
Marchand, and young Napoleon Bertrand, holding the four corners of the
pall. The coffin was deposited on the edge of the grave, which was
hung with black, and near to it were the machinery and the ropes with
which it was to be lowered: every thing offered a mournful aspect;
every thing contributed to increase the grief and affliction which
filled our hearts. Our emotion was great, but deep, concentrated and
silent. The coffin having been uncovered, Abbé Vignali recited the
usual prayers, and the body was consigned to the grave, the feet
turned towards the east. The artillery then fired three successive
volleys of fifteen guns each. During the march of the funeral
procession, the Admiral’s ship had fired twenty-five minute-guns. An
enormous stone, which was to have been employed in the construction of
the Emperor’s new house, was now used to close his grave. The
religious ceremonies being over, that stone was lifted up by means of
a ring fixed in it, and was lowered down over the body, resting on
both sides on a strong stone wall, so as not to touch the coffin. It
was then fastened; the ring was taken away, the hole it had left
filled up, and the masonry covered with a layer of cement.

[Illustration:

  THE TOMB OF NAPOLEON.

  London: Published for HENRY COLBURN, February, 1836.
]

The Emperor’s grave is about a league from Longwood. Its shape is
quadrangular, but wider at the top than at the bottom; its depth is
about twelve feet. The coffin is placed upon two strong pieces of
wood, and isolated on all sides. We were not allowed to place over it
either a stone, or a modest inscription: the Governor opposed this
pious wish; as if a tombstone, or an inscription, could have told the
world more than they already knew!




                         TESTAMENT OF NAPOLEON.

                                -------

NAPOLEON.

_This 15th April, 1821, at Longwood, Island of St. Helena. This is my
    Testament, or act of my last will._

1. I die in the Apostolical Roman religion, in the bosom of which I
was born, more than fifty years since.

2. It is my wish that my ashes may repose on the banks of the Seine,
in the midst of the French people, whom I have loved so well.

3. I have always had reason to be pleased with my dearest wife, Maria
Louisa. I retain for her, to my last moment, the most tender
sentiments—I beseech her to watch, in order to preserve, my son from
the snares which yet environ his infancy.

4. I recommend to my son never to forget that he was born a French
prince, and never to allow himself to become an instrument in the
hands of the triumvirs who oppress the nations of Europe: he ought
never to fight against France, or to injure her in any manner; he
ought to adopt my motto: “_Every thing for the French people._”

5. I die prematurely, assassinated by the English oligarchy and its *
* *. The English nation will not be slow in avenging me.

6. The two unfortunate results of the invasions of France, when she
had still so many resources, are to be attributed to the treason of
Marmont, Augereau, Talleyrand, and La Fayette.

I forgive them—May the posterity of France forgive them as I do!

7. I thank my good and most excellent mother, the Cardinal, my
brothers, Joseph, Lucien, Jerome, Pauline, Caroline, Julie, Hortense,
Catarine, Eugene, for the interest they have continued to feel for me.
I pardon Louis for the libel he published in 1820; it is replete with
false assertions and falsified documents.

8. I disavow the “Manuscript of St. Helena,” and other works; under
the title of Maxims, Sayings, &c., which persons have been pleased to
publish for the last six years. Such are not the rules which have
guided my life. I caused the Duc d’Enghien to be arrested and tried,
because that step was essential to the safety, interest, and honour of
the French people, when the Count d’Artois was maintaining, by his own
confession, sixty assassins at Paris. Under similar circumstances, I
should act in the same way.

                                 II.

1. I bequeath to my son the boxes, orders, and other articles; such as
my plate, field-bed, saddles, spurs, chapel-plate, books, linen which
I have been accustomed to wear and use, according to the list annexed
(A). It is my wish that this slight bequest may be dear to him, as
coming from a father of whom the whole world will remind him.

2. I bequeath to Lady Holland the antique Cameo which Pope Pius VI.
gave me at Tolentino.

3. I bequeath to Count Montholon, two millions of francs, as a proof
of my satisfaction for the filial attentions he has paid me during six
years, and as an indemnity for the losses his residence at St. Helena
has occasioned him.

4. I bequeath to Count Bertrand, five hundred thousand francs.

5. I bequeath to Marchand, my first valet-de-chambre, four hundred
thousand francs. The services he has rendered me are those of a
friend; it is my wish that he should marry the widow, sister, or
daughter, of an officer of my old Guard.

6. Item. To St. Denis, one hundred thousand francs.

7. Item. To Novarre (Noverraz,) one hundred thousand francs.

8. Item. To Pieron, one hundred thousand francs.

9. Item. To Archambaud, fifty thousand francs.

10. Item. To Cursot, twenty-five thousand francs.

11. Item. To Chandellier, twenty-five thousand francs.

12. To the Abbé Vignali, one hundred thousand francs. It is my wish
that he should build his house near the Ponte Novo di Rostino.

13. Item. To Count Las Cases, one hundred thousand francs.

14. Item. To Count Lavalette, one hundred thousand francs.

15. Item. To Larrey, surgeon-in-chief, one hundred thousand francs.—He
is the most virtuous man I have known.

16. Item. To General Brayher, one hundred thousand francs.

17. Item. To General Le Fevre Desnouettes, one hundred thousand
francs.

18. Item. To General Drouot, one hundred thousand francs.

19. Item. To General Cambrone, one hundred thousand francs.

20. Item. To the children of General Mouton Duvernet, one hundred
thousand francs.

21. Item. To the children of the brave Labedoyère, one hundred
thousand francs.

22. Item. To the children of General Girard, killed at Ligny, one
hundred thousand francs.

23. Item. To the children of General Chartrand, one hundred thousand
francs.

24. Item. To the children of the virtuous General Travot, one hundred
thousand francs.

25. Item. To General Lallemand the elder, one hundred thousand francs.

26. Item. To Count Réal, one hundred thousand francs.

27. Item. To Costa de Bastelica, in Corsica, one hundred thousand
francs.

28. Item. To General Clausel, one hundred thousand francs.

29. Item. To Baron de Mennevalle, one hundred thousand francs.

30. Item. To Arnault, the author of Marius, one hundred thousand
francs.

31. Item. To Colonel Marbot, one hundred thousand francs.—I recommend
him to continue to write in defence of the glory of the French armies,
and to confound their calumniators and apostates.

32. Item. To Baron Bignon, one hundred thousand francs.—I recommend
him to write the history of French diplomacy from 1792 to 1815.

33. Item. To Poggi di Talavo, one hundred thousand francs.

34. Item. To surgeon Emmery, one hundred thousand francs.

35. These sums will be raised from the six millions which I deposited
on leaving Paris in 1815; and from the interest at the rate of 5 per
cent. since July 1815. The account thereof will be settled with the
banker by Counts Montholon and Bertrand, and Marchand.

36. Whatever that deposit may produce beyond the sum of five million
six hundred thousand francs, which have been above disposed of, shall
be distributed as a gratuity amongst the wounded at the battle of
Waterloo, and amongst the officers and soldiers of the battalion of
the Isle of Elba, according to a scale to be determined upon by
Montholon, Bertrand, Drouot, Cambrone, and the surgeon Larrey.

37. These legacies, in case of death, shall be paid to the widows and
children, and in default of such, shall revert to the bulk of my
property.

                                 III.

1. My private domain being my property, of which I am not aware that
any French law has deprived me, an account of it will be required from
the Baron de la Bouillerie, the treasurer thereof: it ought to amount
to more than two hundred millions of francs; namely, 1. The portfolio
containing the savings which I made during fourteen years out of my
civil list, which savings amounted to more than twelve millions per
annum, if my memory be good. 2. The produce of this portfolio. 3. The
furniture of my palaces, such as it was in 1814, including the palaces
of Rome, Florence, and Turin. All this furniture was purchased with
moneys accruing from the civil list. 4. The proceeds of my houses in
the kingdom of Italy, such as money, plate, jewels, furniture,
equipages; the accounts of which will be rendered by Prince Eugène and
the steward of the Crown, Campagnoni.

                                                           NAPOLEON.

    (_Second Sheet._)

2. I bequeath my private domain, one half to the surviving officers
and soldiers of the French army who have fought since 1792 to 1815,
for the glory and the independence of the nation; the distribution to
be made in proportion to their appointments upon active service; and
one half to the towns and districts of Alsace, Lorraine,
Franche-Comté, Burgundy, the Isle of France, Champagne Forest,
Dauphiné, which may have suffered by either of the invasions. There
shall be previously set apart from this sum, one million for the town
of Brienne, and one million for that of Méri. I appoint Counts
Montholon and Bertrand, and Marchand, the executors of my will.

This present will, wholly written with my own hand, is signed, and
sealed with my own arms.

                                                           NAPOLEON.

(L. S.)

                              LIST (A).
                        _Annexed to my Will._

                                       Longwood, Island of St. Helena,
                                       this 15th April, 1821.

                                  I.

1. The consecrated vessels which have been in use at my Chapel at
Longwood.

2. I direct Abbé Vignali to preserve them, and to deliver them to my
son when he shall reach the age of sixteen years.

                                 II.

1. My arms; that is to say, my sword, that which I wore at Austerlitz,
the sabre of Sobiesky, my dagger, my broad sword, my hanger, my two
pair of Versailles pistols.

2. My gold dressing-case, that which I made use of on the morning of
Ulm and of Austerlitz, of Jena, of Eylau, of Friedland, of the Island
of Lobau, of the Moskwa, of Montmirail. In this point of view it is my
wish that it may be precious in the eyes of my son. (It has been
deposited with Count Bertrand since 1814.)

3. I charge Count Bertrand with the care of preserving these objects,
and of conveying them to my son when he shall attain the age of
sixteen years.

                                 III.

1. Three small mahogany boxes, containing, the first, thirty-three
snuff-boxes or comfit-boxes; the second, twelve boxes with the
Imperial arms, two small eye-glasses, and four boxes found on the
table of Louis XVIII. in the Tuileries, on the 20th of March, 1815;
the third, three snuff-boxes, ornamented with silver medals habitually
used by the Emperor; and sundry articles for the use of the toilet,
according to the lists numbered I. II. III.

2. My field-beds, which I used in all my campaigns.

3. My field-telescope.

4. My dressing-case, one of each of my uniforms, a dozen of shirts,
and a complete set of each of my dresses, and generally of every thing
used in my toilet.

5. My wash-hand stand.

6. A small clock which is in my bed-chamber at Longwood.

7. My two watches, and the chain of the Empress’s hair.

8. I entrust the care of these articles to Marchand, my principal
valet-de-chambre, and direct him to convey them to my son when he
shall attain the age of sixteen years.

                                 IV.

1. My cabinet of medals.

2. My plate, and my Sèvres china, which I used at St. Helena. (List B.
and C.)

3. I request Count Montholon to take care of these articles, and to
convey them to my son when he shall attain the age of sixteen years.

                                  V.

1. My three saddles and bridles, my spurs which I used at St. Helena.

2. My fowling-pieces, to the number of five.

3. I charge my _chasseur_, Noverraz, with the care of these articles,
and direct him to convey them to my son when he shall attain the age
of sixteen years.

                                 VI.

1. Four hundred volumes, selected from those in my library which I
have been accustomed to use the most.

2. I direct St. Denis to take care of them, and to convey them to my
son when he shall attain the age of sixteen years.

                                                           NAPOLEON.

                                -------

                              LIST (A).

1. None of the articles which have been used by me shall be sold; the
residue shall be divided amongst the executors of my will and my
brothers.

2. Marchand shall preserve my hair, and cause a bracelet to be made of
it, with a little gold clasp, to be sent to the Empress Maria Louisa,
to my mother, and to each of my brothers, sisters, nephews, nieces,
the Cardinal; and one of larger size for my son.

3. Marchand will send one pair of my gold shoe-buckles to Prince
Joseph.

4. A small pair of gold knee-buckles to Prince Lucien.

5. A gold collar-clasp to Prince Jerome.

                                -------

                              LIST (A).

   _Inventory of my effects, which Marchand will take care of, and|
                          convey to my son._

1. My silver dressing-case, that which is on my table, furnished with
all its utensils, razors, &c.

2. My alarum-clock: it is the alarum-clock of Frederic II. which I
took at Potsdam (in box No. III.).

3. My two watches, with the chain of the Empress’s hair, and a chain
of my own hair for the other watch: Marchand will get it made at
Paris.

4. My two seals (one the seal of France, contained in box No. III.).

5. The small gold clock which is now in my bed-chamber.

6. My wash-hand-stand and its water-jug.

7. My night-tables, those I used in France, and my silver-gilt bidet.

8. My two iron bedsteads, my mattresses, and my coverlets, if they can
be preserved.

9. My three silver decanters, which held my eau-de-vie, and which my
_chasseurs_ carried in the field.

10. My French telescope.

11. My spurs, two pair.

12. Three mahogany boxes, Nos. I. II. III., containing my snuff-boxes
and other articles.

13. A silver-gilt perfuming pan.

_Here follow lists of Body Linen and Clothes, too minute to claim
insertion in this place._

                              LIST (B).

_Inventory of the Effects which I left in the possession of Monsieur
the Count de Turenne._

                         {  (It is, by mistake, inserted in List (A.)
                         {  that being the sabre which the Emperor
 One Sabre of Sobiesky.  {  wore at Aboukir, and which is in the
                         {  hands of Count Bertrand.)

One Grand Collar of the Legion of Honour.

One sword of silver-gilt.

One Consular sword.

One sword of steel.

One velvet belt.

One Collar of the Golden Fleece.

One small dressing-case of steel.

One night-lamp of silver.

One handle of an antique sabre.

One hat _à la_ Henry IV. and a toque.[50] The lace of the Emperor.

One small cabinet of medals.

Two Turkey carpets.

Two mantles of crimson velvet, embroidered, with vests, and
small-clothes.

  I give to my Son  the sabre of Sobiesky.
        Do.         the collar of the Legion of Honour.
        Do.         the sword silver gilt.
        Do.         the Consular Sword.
        Do.         the steel sword.
        Do.         the collar of the Golden Fleece.
        Do.         the hat _à la_ Henry IV. and the _toque_.
        Do.         the golden dressing-case for the teeth,
                              which is in the hands of the dentist.

To the Empress Maria Louisa, my lace.

To Madame, the silver night-lamp.

To the Cardinal, the small steel dressing-case.

To Prince Eugene, the wax-candle-stick, silver gilt.

To the Princess Pauline, the small cabinet of medals.

To the Queen of Naples, a small Turkey carpet.

To the Queen Hortense, a small Turkey carpet.

To Prince Jerome, the handle of the antique sabre.

To Prince Joseph, an embroidered mantle, vest, and small-clothes.

To Prince Lucien, an embroidered mantle, vest, and small-clothes.

                                                           NAPOLEON.

Footnote 50:

  A velvet hat, with a flat crown, and brims turned up.

                                -------

                                    This 24th April, 1821, Longwood.

_This is my Codicil or act of my last Will._

Upon the funds remitted in gold to the Empress Maria Louisa, my very
dear and well-beloved spouse, at Orleans, in 1814, she remains in my
debt two millions, of which I dispose by the present Codicil, for
the purpose of recompensing my most faithful servants, whom moreover
I recommend to the protection of my dear Maria Louisa.

1. I recommend to the Empress to cause the income of thirty thousand
francs, which Count Bertrand possessed in the Duchy of Parma, and
upon the Mont Napoleon at Milan, to be restored to him, as well as
the arrears due.

2. I make the same recommendation to her with regard to the Duke of
Istria, Duroc’s daughter, and others of my servants who have
continued faithful to me, and who have never ceased to be dear to
me: she knows them.

3. Out of the above-mentioned two millions I bequeath three hundred
thousand francs to Count Bertrand, of which he will lodge one
hundred thousand in the treasurer’s chest, to be employed in
legacies of conscience, according to my dispositions.

4. I bequeath two hundred thousand francs to Count Montholon, of
which he will lodge one hundred thousand in the treasurer’s chest,
for the same purpose as above-mentioned.

5. Item, two hundred thousand francs to Count Las Cases, of which he
will lodge one hundred thousand in the treasurer’s chest, for the
same purpose as above-mentioned.

6. Item, to Marchand one hundred thousand francs, of which he will
place fifty thousand in the treasurer’s chest, for the same purpose
as above-mentioned.

7. To Jean Jerome Levi, the Mayor of Ajaccio at the commencement of
the Revolution, or to his widow, children, or grand-children, one
hundred thousand francs.

8. To Duroc’s daughter, one hundred thousand francs.

9. To the son of Bessières, Duke of Istria, one hundred thousand
francs.

10. To General Drouot, one hundred thousand francs.

11. To Count Lavalette, one hundred thousand francs.

12. Item, one hundred thousand francs; that is to say:—

      Twenty-five thousand to Piéron, my maître d’hôtel.
      Twenty-five thousand to Novarre, my _chasseur_.
      Twenty-five thousand to St. Denis, the keeper of my books.
      Twenty-five thousand to Santini, my former door-keeper.

13. Item, one hundred thousand francs; that is to say:—

      Forty thousand to Planat, my orderly officer.
      Twenty thousand to Herbert, lately house-keeper of
        Rambouillet, and who belonged to my chamber in Egypt.
      Twenty thousand to Lavigné, who was lately keeper of one of my
        stables, and who was my _piqueur_ in Egypt.
      Twenty thousand to Jeanet Dervieux, who was overseer of the
        stables, and served me in Egypt.

14. Two hundred thousand francs shall be distributed in alms to the
inhabitants of Brienne-le-Chateau, who have suffered most.

15. The three hundred thousand francs remaining shall be distributed
to the officers and soldiers of the battalion of my guard at the
Island of Elba who may be now alive, or to their widows and
children, in proportion to their appointments, and according to an
estimate which shall be fixed by my testamentary executors: those
who have suffered amputation, or have been severely wounded, shall
receive double; the estimate to be fixed by Larrey and Emmery.

This codicil is written entirely with my own hand, signed, and
sealed with my arms.

                                                           NAPOLEON.

                                 This 24th of April, 1821, Longwood.

           _This is my Codicil, or note of my last Will._

Out of the settlement of my civil list of Italy, such as money,
jewels, plate, linen, equipages, of which the Viceroy is the
depositary, and which belonged to me, I dispose of two millions,
which I bequeath to my most faithful servants. I hope that, without
availing himself of any reason to the contrary, my son Eugene
Napoleon will pay them faithfully. He cannot forget the forty
millions which I gave him in Italy, and in the distribution of the
inheritance of his mother.

1. Out of these two millions, I bequeath to Count Bertrand three
hundred thousand francs, of which he will deposit one hundred
thousand in the treasurer’s chest, to be disposed of according to my
dispositions in payment of legacies of conscience.

2. To Count Montholon, two hundred thousand francs, of which he will
deposit one hundred thousand in the chest, for the same purpose as
above-mentioned.

3. To Count Las Cases, two hundred thousand francs, of which he will
deposit one hundred thousand in the chest, for the same purpose as
above-mentioned.

4. To Marchand, one hundred thousand francs, of which he will
deposit fifty thousand in the chest, for the same purpose as
above-mentioned.

5. To Count La Valette, one hundred thousand francs.

6. To General Hogendorf, of Holland, my aide-de-camp, who has
retired to the Brazils, one hundred thousand francs.

7. To my aide-de-camp, Corbineau, fifty thousand francs.

8. To my aide-de-camp, General Caffarelli, fifty thousand francs.

9. To my aide-de-camp, Dejean, fifty thousand francs.

10. To Percy, surgeon-in-chief at Waterloo, fifty thousand francs.

11. Fifty thousand francs, that is to say:—

 Ten thousand to Pieron, my maitre d’hotel.
 Ten thousand to St. Denis, my head _chasseur_.
 Ten thousand to Noverraz.
 Ten thousand to Cursot, my clerk of the kitchen.
 Ten thousand to Archamband, my _piqueur_.

12. To Baron De Mennevalle, fifty thousand francs.

13. To the Duke d’Istria, son of Bessières, fifty thousand francs.

14. To the daughter of Duroc, fifty thousand francs.

15. To the children of Labedoyère, fifty thousand francs.

16. To the children of Mouton Duvernet, fifty thousand francs.

17. To the children of the brave and virtuous General Travot, fifty
thousand francs.

18. To the children of Chartrand, fifty thousand francs.

19. To General Cambrone, fifty thousand francs.

20. To General Lefevre Desnouettes, fifty thousand francs.

21. To be distributed amongst such proscribed persons as wander in
foreign countries, whether they be French, Italian, Belgians, Dutch,
Spanish, or inhabitants of the departments of the Rhine, under the
directions of my executors, and upon their orders, one hundred
thousand francs.

22. To be distributed amongst those who suffered amputation, or were
severely wounded at Lingy or Waterloo, who may be still living,
according to lists drawn up by my executors, to whom shall be added
Cambrone, Larrey, Percy, and Emmery. The guards shall be paid
double; those of the Island of Elba, quadruple; two hundred thousand
francs.

This codicil is written entirely with my own hand, signed, and
sealed with my arms.

                                                           NAPOLEON.

                         ---------------------

                              This 24th of April, 1821, at Longwood.

     _This is a third Codicil to my Will of the 15th of April._

1. Amongst the diamonds of the Crown which were delivered up in
1814, there were some to the value of five or six hundred thousand
francs, not belonging to it, but which formed part of my private
property; repossession shall be obtained of them in order to
discharge my legacies.

2. I had in the hands of the banker Torlonia, at Rome, bills of
exchange to the amount of two or three hundred thousand francs, the
product of my revenues of the Island of Elba since 1815. The Sieur
De la Perruse, although no longer my treasurer, and not invested
with any character, possessed himself of this sum. He shall be
compelled to refund it.

3. I bequeath the Duke of Istria three hundred thousand francs, of
which only one hundred thousand francs shall be reversible to his
widow, should the Duke be dead before payment of the legacy. It is
my wish, should there be no inconvenience in it, that the Duke may
marry Duroc’s daughter.

4. I bequeath to the Duchess of Frioul, the daughter of Duroc, two
hundred thousand francs: should she be dead before the payment of
this legacy, none of it shall be given to the mother.

5. I bequeath to General Rigaud, (to him who was proscribed) one
hundred thousand francs.

6. I bequeath to Boisnod, the intendant commissary, one hundred
thousand francs.

7. I bequeath to the children of General Letort, who was killed in
the campaign of 1815, one hundred thousand francs.

8. These eight hundred thousand francs of legacies shall be
considered as inserted at the end of Article thirty-six of my
testament, which will make the legacies I have disposed of by will
amount to the sum of six million four hundred thousand francs,
without including the donations I have made by my second codicil.

This is written with my own hand, signed, and sealed with my arms.

(L. S.)

                                                           NAPOLEON.

                    [On the outside is written:]

This is my third codicil to my will, entirely written with my own
hand, signed, and sealed with my arms.

To be opened the same day, and immediately after the opening of my
will.

                                                           NAPOLEON.

                         ---------------------

                                 This 24th of April, 1821. Longwood.

            _This is a fourth Codicil to my Testament._

By the dispositions we have heretofore made, we have not fulfilled
all our obligations, which has decided us to make this fourth
codicil.

1. We bequeath to the son or grandson of Baron Duthiel,
lieutenant-general of artillery, and formerly lord of St. André, who
commanded the school of Auxonne before the Revolution, the sum of
one hundred thousand francs, as a memento of gratitude for the care
which that brave general took of us when we were lieutenant and
captain under his orders.

2. Item. To the son or grandson of General Dugomier, who commanded
in chief the array of Toulon, the sum of one hundred thousand
francs. We, under his orders, directed that siege, and commanded the
artillery: it is a testimonial of remembrance for the marks of
esteem, affection, and friendship, which that brave and intrepid
general gave us.

3. Item. We bequeath one hundred thousand francs to the son or
grandson of the deputy of the Convention, Gasparin, representative
of the people at the army of Toulon, for having protected and
sanctioned with his authority the plan we had given, which procured
the capture of that city, and which was contrary to that sent by the
Committee of Public Safety. Gasparin, by his protection, sheltered
us from the persecution and ignorance of the general officers who
commanded the army before the arrival of my friend Dugomier.

4. Item. We bequeath one hundred thousand francs to the widow, son,
or grandson, of our aide-de-camp Muiron, killed at our side at
Arcola, covering us with his body.

5. Item. Ten thousand francs to the subaltern officer Cantillon, who
has undergone a trial upon the charge of having endeavoured to
assassinate Lord Wellington, of which he was pronounced innocent.
Cantillon had as much right to assassinate that _oligarchist_ as the
latter had to send me to perish upon the rock of St. Helena.
Wellington, who proposed this outrage, attempted to justify it by
pleading the interest of Great Britain. Cantillon, if he had really
assassinated that lord, would have pleaded the same excuse, and been
justified by the same motive—the interest of France—to get rid of
this General, who, moreover, by violating the capitulation of Paris,
had rendered himself responsible for the blood of the martyrs Ney,
Labedoyere, &c.: and for the crime of having pillaged the museums,
contrary to the text of the treaties.

6. These four hundred thousand francs shall be added to the six
million four hundred thousand of which we have disposed, and will
make our legacies amount to six million eight hundred and ten
thousand francs; these four hundred and ten thousand are to be
considered as forming part of our testament, Article 36, and to
follow in every respect the same course as the other legacies.

7. The nine thousand pounds sterling which we gave to Count and
Countess Montholon, should, if they have been paid, be deducted and
carried to the account of the legacies which we have given him by
our testament. If they have not been paid, our notes of hand shall
be annulled.

8. In consideration of the legacy given by our will to Count
Montholon, the pension of twenty thousand francs granted to his wife
is annulled. Count Montholon is charged with the payment of it to
her.

9. The administration of such an inheritance, until its final
liquidation, requiring expenses of offices, journeys, missions,
consultations, and lawsuits, we expect that our testamentary
executors shall retain 3 per cent. upon all the legacies, as well
upon the six million eight hundred thousand francs, as upon the sums
contained in the codicils, and upon the two hundred millions of
francs of the private domain.

10. The amount of the sums thus retained shall be deposited in the
hands of a treasurer, and disbursed by drafts from our testamentary
executors.

11. Should the sums arising from the aforesaid deductions not be
sufficient to defray the expenses, provisions shall be made to that
effect at the expense of the three testamentary executors and the
treasurer, each in proportion to the legacy which we have bequeathed
to them in our will and codicils.

12. Should the sums arising from the before-mentioned subtractions
be more than necessary, the surplus shall be divided amongst our
three testamentary executors and the treasurer, in the proportion of
their respective legacies.

13. We nominate Count Las Cases, and in default of him his son, and
in default of the latter, General Drouot, to be treasurer.

This present codicil is entirely written with our hand, signed, and
sealed with our arms.

                                                           NAPOLEON.




                              THE END.




                                 INDEX.

 Abdication, of Napoleon, i. #11#; iv. 114
   —Las Cases’ reflections on that proceeding, i. #55#

 Africa, Napoleon’s remarks on the expedition to, ii. #151#

 Aix-la-Chapelle, the Congress at, Las Cases’ preparations for
    petitioning, iv. 342
   —Letter of Madame Mere to, 343
   —Las Cases’ note to, 344
   —Representations to, 375

 Alexander, the Emperor, Las Cases’ letter to, at Laybach, iv. 384

 —--, the Emperor, his aversion to Eugene Beauharnois, i. #207#

 —-- the Great, Napoleon’s remarks on, iv. 140

 Algerines, their predilection for Napoleon, i. #363#

 Allies, Convention of the, respecting Napoleon, ii. #80#

 Ambassadors, Persian and Turkish at Paris, ii. #110#
   —their conduct in the fashionable world, #112#

 America, Napoleon invited to, ii. #207#

 Amiens, rupture of the treaty of, iv. 39

 Amours of, Napoleon, i. #211#

 Amsterdam, Napoleon’s speech at, iii. #239#

 Ancients, the, Napoleon’s opinion of the armies of, i. #189#

 Anecdotes of a courtier, ii. #316#

 —-- amusing, iii. #59#

 —-- of Napoleon, iii. #238#, #284#, iv. 67

 Antwerp, Napoleon’s designs with regard to, iv. 47

 Antommarchi, Dr., extracts from his work, iv. 393

 Army, the French, conspiracy in, Egypt, i. #133#
   —Privations of, #136#
   —loss sustained by in Egypt, #143#
   —contradictory reports respecting, #146#

 Artillery, remarks of Napoleon on, ii. 354

 Arras, the Bishop of, his stupidity, i. #173#

 Aubry, General, i. #101#

 Augereau, Napoleon’s opinion of, i. #189#

 Austria, the Royal Family of, i. #205#

 —-- the Emperor of, letter of Las Cases to, iv. 347

 Balcombe, Mr., Las Cases’ removal to his cottage, iv. 205

 Balls, masked, fondness of Napoleon for, iii. #91#

 Barras, M., some account of, ii. #256#

 Barry, Mr., medical skill of, iv. 254
   —his intimacy with Las Cases, 263

 Bathurst, Lord, letter of Lord Castlereagh to, on the Treaty of
    Fontainebleau, iv. 133
   —Napoleon’s opinion of him, 154
   —Las Cases’ letter to, 315

 Battle, chance of danger in, ii. #39#

 Bauer, M., his opinion of Napoleon, i. #79#

 Beauharnois, Eugene, conduct of the Emperor Alexander towards i.
    #206#
   —receiving his father’s sword, ii. #186#

 Beauharnois, Mad. de, her acquaintance with Napoleon, i. #103#

 —-- Stephanie, particulars respecting, ii. #196#
   —conduct of the Emperor Alexander to, #197#

 Becker, General, letter from the minister at war to, i. #17#

 Bellerophon, Embarkation of the Emperor on, board the, i. #26#
   —arrives at Torbay, #32#
   —Departure of the Emperor from the, #51#
   —Berthier, General, his conduct in Egypt, i. #134#
   —attachment of Napoleon to, #215#
   —Madame V—-- and, iii. #16#

 Bernadotte, elevated to the throne of Sweden, iii. #107#
   —letter of Napoleon to, #110#
   —the Emperor’s reflections on, iv. 109

 Bertrand, Madame, her affliction on hearing of her husband’s
    departure for St. Helena, i. #40#

 Bertrand, Count, his letter to Las Cases, iv. 354
   —his protest of the 22nd of July, 1818, 361
   —letter of to Cardinal Fesch, 363
   —correspondence of Las Cases with, 364, 367, 369, 371, 373

 Bessieres, General, some account of, i. #340#
   —his death, #341#

 Bizanet, General, his gallant conduct at Bergen-op-zoom, ii.
    #242#

 Blacas, M., libels on Napoleon found in his apartment, i.
    #169#

 Bonaparte, Napoleon, his return to the Elysée, after the battle of
    Waterloo, i. #10#
   —particulars relative to his abdication, #11#; iv. 114
   —the Provisional Government presented to, i. #13#
   —his departure from Malmaison, #15#
   —document authorizing General Becker to watch and guard him,
      #15#
   —resolutions entered into by the commission of government
      respecting his departure from France, _ib._
   —his itinerary during his journey from Paris, #19#
   —his reception at Rochefort, #20#
   —plan to save him, _ib._
   —feeling of the South of France towards, #23#
   —discussions on his purposed escape, #24#
   —his letter to the Prince Regent, _ib._
   —suspected escape of, #25#
   —embarks on board the Bellerophon, #26#
   —visits Admiral Hotham on board the Superb, #27#
   —anecdote of, _ib._
   —etiquette of the English to, #25#
   —summary of his situation at Rochelle, dictated by himself,
      #29#
   —arrives at Torbay, #32#
   —reports respecting his destination, #33#
   —curiosity excited on his reaching Plymouth, #36#
   —protests against his removal to St. Helena, #37#
   —communication made to him by Lord Keith, #37#
   —remarkable words of, #40#
   —proposes to write his memoirs, #42#, #109#
   —curious document of, when first consul, _ib._
   —his departure from Plymouth, #43#
   —his protest, _ib._
   —persons allowed to accompany, #46#
   —instructions of ministers to Admiral Cockburn respecting,
      #47#
   —His effects examined by Admiral Cockburn, #50#
   —quits the Bellerophon, #51#
   —conduct of the crew of the Northumberland to, #52#
   —description of his cabin, #53#
   —Las Cases’ reflections on his abdication, #55#
   —his mode of living on board the Northumberland, #57#
   —his occupations, #59#
   —his origin, and family, #61#
   —conduct of the midshipmen to, #72#
   —details of the Emperor’s childhood, #73#
   —his attachment to Madame du Colombier, #81#
   —his extensive acquirements, #82#
   —question solved by, #83#
   —anecdotes of, #83#; iii. #229#; iv. 111
   —espouses the cause of the revolution, 85
   —commences learning English, i. #87#
   —his plan for conducting the siege of Toulon, #88#
   —takes that place, #95#
   —his assistance to emigrants, #97#
   —his attachment to Duroc, #99#
   —made a general of infantry, #101#
   —his presence of mind during a popular commotion, #103#
   —military administration of, #105#
   —his indifference to riches, #106#
   —his ascendancy over his troops, #108#
   —calumnies against, #115#
   —his advance to power, #118#
   —dictates to Las Cases his campaigns of Italy, #119#
   —respect paid to, on crossing the line, #122#
   —statements of Sir Robert Wilson regarding, #123#
   —his intrepidity, #133#
   —visits the Red Sea, #135#
   —popular among the Egyptians, #138#
   —his method of dictating, #148#
   —arrives at St. Helena, #154#
   —narrative of his residence at Briars, #156#
   —his wretched accommodation there, #158#
   —misery of his situation, #163#
   —indignant at his ill-treatment, #164#
   —communication of, to the British Government, #165#
   —his mode of living at Briars, #167#
   —libels on, #169#
   —his opinion of his libellers, #170#
   —letter of the king to, and Napoleon’s reply, #174#
   —reported to have made overtures to the French Princes,
      #175#
   —his daily occupations, #176#, #195#
   —his remarks on the Council of State, #177#
   —lenity of, #180#
   —dismisses the Legislative Body, #183#
   —his reasons for dissolving the Tribunate, #185#
   —his opinion of the Generals of the army of Italy, #188#
   —his ideas on the armies of the Ancients, #189#
   —compares the French with the Romans, #191#
   —political schemes of, #192#
   —contrasts the characters of his two Empresses, #198#
   —his remarks on the education of Princes, #204#
   —his landing at Cannes, #207#
   —private amours of, #211#
   —palliates the conduct of his enemies, #214#
   —circumstances of his fall, #216#
   —officers of his household in 1814, #217#
   —his reservation of Corsica, #220#
   —reviews the events of the revolution, #221#
   —his ideas of public opinion, #223#
   —indisposition of, #234#
   —equestrian feats of, #235#
   —his diet and medicine, #236#
   —his convalescence and recreations, #237#
   —atrocious conspiracies against, #238#
   —his escape from the Infernal Machine, #240#
   —his kindness to a slave, #241#
   —state of crime during his dominion, #243#
   —escapes of, during the campaigns of Italy, #246#
   —his reflections on a field of battle, #248#
   —his remarks on several Generals, #251#, #337#
   —annoyances practised towards, #356#
   —his removal to Longwood, #260#
   —persons composing his establishment, #265#
   —Las Cases’ character of, #268#
   —the Abbe de Pradt’s analysis of his character, #269#
   —his style of addressing the Empresses, #274#
   —anecdote of and the Queen of Prussia, #276#
   —his system of espionage, #277#
   —abuses in the Post Office under, #278#
   —liberty of the Press during his reign, #280#
   —harsh treatment of at Longwood, #281#, #311#
   —his remonstrances, and the insulting replies to them, #283#
   —his ideas of popularity, #284#
   —frequent dangers and escapes of, #288#
   —his mode of answering the libels of the English Ministers,
      #299#
   —amelioration of his condition, #302#, #303#
   —nick-names given to persons and places by, #307#
   —attentions paid to, by English sailors, #310#
   —his method of learning English, #324#
   —visited by Governor Wilks, #325#
   —Madame de Stäel, &c. #328#
   —his opinion of Bernardin St. Pierre and his works, #333#
   —remarks of, on French Historians, #334#
   —his personal danger at Eylau, Jena, &c., #335#
   —his progress in English, #344#, #350#
   —remarks of, on St. Helena, #346#
   —caricatures on, #357#
   —his views of French politics, #359#
   —picture of domestic happiness drawn by, #361#
   —predilection of the Algerines for, #363#
   —his opinion of the great French poets, #368#
   —his credit on his return from Elba, #372#
   —his talent as an accountant, #373#
   —remarks of on the invasion of England, #374#
   —etiquette of his court, #379#
   —the officers of his household, #383#
   —his opinion of the influence of a court on a nation, #386#
   —presentation of the Captains of the Chinese fleet to, #388#
   —facetiousness of, #390#
   —remarks of, on the character of the French, #395#
   —lamentation of, ii. #4#
   —M. Constant’s visit to, at the Tuileries, and his return from
      Elba, #10#
   —well qualified for governing the French, #12#
   —insult offered to, by Admiral Cockburn, #14#
   —his reflections on the death of Ney, #15#
   —his message for the Prince Regent respecting his inhuman
      treatment, #17#
   —affection of the inhabitants of the Isle of France for,
      #17#
   —unwholesome food provided for, #19#
   —his remarks on Catiline’s conspiracy, the Gracchi, Historians,
      &c., #23#, #24#
   —on fortification, #26#
   —on moveable artillery, #27#
   —his cheerfulness, #30#
   —early friendships of, #31#
   —his universal celebrity, #32#
   —political self-examination of, #33#
   —his betrayers, #38#
   —remarks of, on his expedition to the East, #40#
   —description of his apartments, #44#
   —details of his toilet, dress, &c. #46#
   —absurd reports regarding, #47#
   —plots against, #49#
   —account of Cerache’s conspiracy against, #50#
   —his hesitation as to the course to be pursued after the battle
      of Waterloo, #57#
   —characteristic traits of, #59#
   —his opinion of Pozzo di Borgo, Metternich, Bassano, Clarke,
      Cambacérès, Lebrun Fouché, &c. #62#
   —good advice of, #72#
   —his return from Elba foreseen at the time of his departure from
      Fontainebleau, #74#
   —convention of the Allied Sovereigns respecting, #80#
   —last interview of Governor Wilks with, #84#
   —his message to the Prince Regent, #87#
   —state of his finances, #90#
   —his commercial shrewdness, #92#
   —his criticism on Voltaire, and other French dramatic writers,
      #95#
   —Sir Hudson Lowe’s first insult to, #99#
   —his remarks on the Russian War, #104#
   —magnanimity of, #108#
   —his remonstrances with Sir Hudson Lowe, #116#
   —summary of his history, #120#
   —his seclusion, #121#
   —remarks of, on European Sovereigns at different periods,
      #124#
   —details respecting his family, #132#
   —on the war in Spain, #134#
   —anecdote of, and Soult’s wife, #143#
   —his reception of the passengers in the Bengal fleet, #158#
   —angry interview between him and Sir Hudson Lowe, #177#
   —his observations on the Empress Josephine, #184#
   —curious details of his marriage to, and divorce from, the
      Empress Josephine, #187#
   —his reflections on popular errors, #194#
   —personal dangers of, #201#
   —political reflections of, #202#
   —his intentions if he had proceeded to America, #206#
   —letter of an American to, #207#
   —his anxiety respecting his abdication, #208#
   —observations of, on the state of French manufactures, #209#
   —on physiognomy, #210#, #389#
   —respect shown to by English soldiers, #212#
   —his affection for Corsica, #212#
   —difficulty of forming his court, #216#
   —receives a letter from his mother, #220#
   —relates the conspiracy of Georges, Moreau, and Pichegru,
      #221#
   —attempts to assassinate, #225#
   —his observations on the situation of England, #226#
   —on the influence of Rousseau and Voltaire on the French,
      #229#
   —his rebuke of a member of the Institute, #233#
   —public censures of, #235#
   —public attacks on, #236#
   —reflections of, on Sir Hudson Lowe, #237#
   —expenses of his household, #238#
   —transfer of his property, #239#
   —his jokes on women, #240#
   —resumes the dictation of his memoirs, #241#
   —plan of education prescribed by, #243#
   —his kindness 244
   —his imaginary schemes for the future, #252#
   —absurd reports respecting, _ib._
   —conversation of, on religion, #253#
   —his portraits of the directors, #256#
   —his celebrated order of the day, #265#
   —his conduct towards the directory, #265#
   —his influence, #263#
   —falsehood of the published conversation between him and Lord
      Whitworth, #270#
   —his opinion of the British Ministers, #273#
   —puns made by, #276#
   —his notices of Bailli, Monges, Gregoire, &c. #277#
   —his notes on the convention, #281#
   —conversation of, on the liberty of the press, #291#
   —his letter to Murat on Spanish Affairs, #302#
   —interview of the Queen of Prussia and, at Tilsit, #308#
   —his differences with the King of Prussia, #311#
   —attachment of the Emperor Alexander to, #312#
   —etiquette of, #315#
   —his conduct in the Council of State, #320#
   —his habit of taking snuff, #321#
   —attentions of his Chamberlains, _ib._
   —his delicacy, #322#
   —traits of kind feeling in, #323#
   —his speeches in the Council of State, #325#
   —his devotion to France, #326#
   —his rebuke of an Ambassador, #324#
   —on the proposal for a new organization of the National Guard,
      #330#
   —his recollections of Waterloo, #333#
   —his observations on misrepresentations of authors, #336#
   —prophetic remarks of, #337#
   —conversation of, respecting Las Cases and his Atlas, #339#
   —his memory, #349#
   —his ideas of, and plans on, political economy, #350#
   —on foreign trade, #351#
   —on internal manufactures, _ib._
   —his discourse on Artillery, #354#
   —reviews the characters of his Generals, #355#
   —different tactics of, and Moreau, #357#
   —annoyed by rats, _ib._
   —imputed intrigue of, #360#
   —defence of his second marriage, #377#
   —his remarks on the pillage of armies, #379#
   —Sir Pulteney Malcolm introduced to, _ib._
   —his choice of his colleagues in the Government, #385#
   —instructs M. de Montholon’s son, #388#
   —said to be descended from the Man in the Iron Mask, #390#
   —his account of Madame Junot and her relations, #393#
   —narrates the death of Lannes, #395#
   —describes the works at Cherbourg, iii. #5#
   —improvements of, at Cherbourg, #7#
   —his plans for the advancement of his Navy, #11#
   —audience given to Sir Hudson Lowe by, and Napoleon’s
      conversation with, him, #13#
   —and Grassini, #15#
   —remarks of, on the Faubourg St. Germain, Aristocracy, Democracy,
      &c. #17#
   —observations of, on Illyria, #24#
   —on Prisons & Imprisonment, #34#
   —in Egypt, #38#
   —his Chinese servant, #40#
   —discourse of on the marvellous, #42#
   —his refutation of Gall’s and Lavater’s doctrines, #44#
   —repeated vexations of, #45#
   —interview between, and Admiral Malcolm, #49#
   —his Court, #51#
   —his rebuke of Santini, on his intending to assassinate Sir
      Hudson Lowe, #53#
   —his opinion of La Harpe and his writings, #55#
   —on monastic institutions, #56#
   —his observations on Versailles, #59#
   —his remarks on the emigration to Coblentz, #74#
   —his sentimental journey, #88#
   —present at the attack on the Tuileries, #90#
   —his attendance at masked balls, #91#
   —scientific questions proposed by, #94#
   —canals constructed by, #95#
   —public improvements of, #97#
   —his disbursements, #99#
   —projects of, #100#
   —his plan for a history of Europe, #101#
   —stigmatizes the Regency, #102#
   —his conversation respecting Gustavus III. and IV. #104#
   —elevates Bernadotte to the Swedish throne, #107#
   —his letter to Bernadotte, #110#
   —his paternal home, #113#
   —on the fatalities which had occurred to him, #118#
   —his birth-day, #123#
   —on the suppression of the Polytechnic School, #124#
   —religious idea of, #124#
   —his differences with the Pope, #129#
   —and influence over him, #131#
   —new interview and conversation with Sir Hudson Lowe, #137#
   —libels against, #141#
   —his dislike to medicine, #146#
   —protest of, #151#
   —remarks of, on Joubert, #162#
   —describes the burning of Moscow, #163#
   —his intentions if the conflagration had not taken place,
      #164#
   —on the coronation of, #176#
   —cause of the exasperation of England against, #178#
   —his narrative of the campaign of Waterloo, #179#
   —the motives which regulated his conduct after the battle,
      #181#
   —his plan for a political defence of himself, #194#
   —remarks of Turenne, Catinat, &c. #196#
   —errors of authors respecting, #197#
   —on his various battles, _ib._
   —Sir Sydney Smith &c. #200#
   —his departure from Egypt, #201#
   —singular changes of fortune related by, #203#
   —on Madame de Maintenon, #205#
   —interesting anecdote of M. Daru, &c. #207#
   —jocularity of, #208#
   —observations of, on the campaign of Saxony, #209#
   —his negociations, #219#
   —fatalities and perfidies which caused his failure in the
      campaign of Saxony, #229#
   —his visit to Holland, #239#
   —discourse, _ib._
   —on Revolutions, #241#
   —confidential conversation of, #247#
   —his observations on the English Colonial System, #249#
   —on the blunders of Castlereagh, #251#
   —on the National Debt, #252#
   —on liberal opinions, #255#
   —reduction of his household, #256#
   —allusions to his Court at the Tuileries, #257#
   —his _Manuscrit de L’Isle d’Elbe_, #260#
   —his inauguration as Emperor, #270#
   —alliances of, #273#
   —his marriage with Maria Louisa, #274#
   —his summary of the Campaign of Saxony, #275#
   —illness of, #281#
   —enormous gratuities of, #282#
   —his good humour, #286#
   —bad provisions, wine, &c. furnished to, _ib._
   —his criticism on Lucien Bonaparte’s “Charlemagne,” 288
   —Sir Hudson Lowe reduces the quantity of provisions allowed to,
      #289#
   —narrative of his return from Elba, #290#
   —his reception by the soldiery, #295#
   —his arrival at Grenoble, #296#
   —reconciliation between him and Ney, #299#
   —conduct of his Generals on his return, #300#
   —his entry into Paris, #301#
   —his brothers and sisters who had become authors, #303#
   —statistical calculations of, #306#
   —sale of his plate, #308#
   —fresh vexations from Sir Hudson Lowe, #309#
   —conversation of, on the bills of St. Domingo, #310#
   —his plans of administrations, #313#
   —on sensibility, #316#
   —his attachment to his wife and son, _ib._
   —on the inhabitants of the East and West, Polygamy, &c.
      #317#
   —particulars respecting Louis, King of Holland, related by,
      #321#
   —complaints of, against the members of his family, #322#
   —his reasons for placing his relations on thrones, #324#
   —his letter to King Louis, #325#
   —his plan for a history, #331#
   —his secretary, #332#
   —great labours of, #334#
   —treachery of one of his secretaries, #338#
   —his dictation for another portion of his memoirs, #338#
   —national works of, #340#
   —his refutation of the calumnies of Castlereagh, #342#
   —peculiarities of, #345#
   —his hand-writing, #346#
   —his ideas of predestination, #347#
   —fruitless attempts of Sir Hudson Lowe to be received by, _ib._
   —conversation of, on legislation, #349#
   —in Egypt, #350#
   —reads Las Cases’ journal, #354#
   —reflections of, on his son and Austria, #360#
   —his observations on Sir Hudson Lowe’s restrictions, #363#
   —his recollections of M. de Cobentzel, #371#
   —M. de Gallo outwitted by, #372#
   —General Clarke and, #373#
   —singular dream of, #378#
   —privations of, #379#
   —his perambulations in disguise, #393#
   —conversations of, with the populace of Paris, _ib._
   —increasing illness of, #395#
   —new protest of, _ib._
   —conversation of, on Louis XVI., Marie Antoinette, Madame Campan,
      Leonard, the Princess de Lamballe, &c. #396#, #397#,
      #398#, #399#, #400#
   —his early career, iv. 4
   —remarks of a French female authoress, 7
   —his eulogium on Baron Larrey, 9
   —care taken of the wounded in his armies, _ib._
   —Las Cases’ present to, 12
   —new torments practised by Sir Hudson Lowe towards, 14
   —visible decline of, 16
   —his views and intentions with respect to the Russian war, 19
   —causes of his fall, 20
   —his instructions to M—- to serve as his guide in the Mission to
      Poland, 1812, _ib._
   —moderation of, 28
   —continued indisposition of, 29, 31, 36, 38, 65
   —discourse of on immorality, 30
   —jocular familiarity of, 34
   —the name of the GREAT NATION first applied to France by, 37
   —his proposed exchange of prisoners with England, 40
   —his designs with regard to Antwerp, 47
   —public works executed by, 52
   —report of the state of the Empire under, 60
   —observations of, on Mallet’s plot, 64
   —on French inconstancy, 65
   —allusions to his family, 67
   —his state bed, 69
   —remarks of, on Fox, Pitt, the East India Company, &c. 79
   —discussion of, on political economy, 81
   —opposition to his improvements in the, 83
   —his imperial system, 85
   —in La Vendée, 91
   —remarks of, on the drama, 92
   —anecdote respecting the Infernal Machine, &c., 94
   —Dumouriez more daring than, 97
   —Prince Leopold, &c., _ib._, 99
   —his commencement of diplomacy 101
   —his plans for the concentration of different nations, 104
   —his reasons for not divulging these plans, 108
   —remarks of, on the war with Russia, 109
   —reflections of, on Bernadotte, _ib._
   —his little confidence in the favourable issue of the events of
      1815, 110
   —his intentions of restoring the Bourbons, 113
   —ingratitude to, 114
   —occurrences on his departure from Fontainebleau, 124
   —his address to the French on his return from Elba, 125
   —allusions to his second marriage, 136
   —discourse of, on Alexander, Cæsar, Hannibal, &c. 140
   —on the art of War, 143
   —on the conscription, 145
   —on Lawsuits, 146
   —on the clergy, 147
   —misrepresentations of Madame de Stäel’s remarks on, 152
   —his opinion of Lord Bathurst, 154
   —of Lord Castlereagh, 155
   —on Lord Wellington’s conduct, 160
   —review of his principal Ministers, 162
   —treason to, 163
   —his opinion of gaming, 165
   —his account of M. de Rochefoucault, 166
   —characteristic anecdotes of, 167
   —his regard for equality of rights, 174
   —his military harangues, 176
   —his objects in creating nobility, 178
   —on the difficulties which history presents, 179
   —his discovery of the plot of Georges, &c. 183
   —his remarks on Georges, Pichegru, and Moreau, 184
   —observations of, on the Duke D’Enghien, 190
   —opportunities of procuring the assassination of his rivals, 195
   —his letter to Las Cases on his imprisonment, 220
   —his message to Las Cases on his departure, 236
   —wines sent by Las Cases to, 273
   —Las Cases’ transactions with his family, 339
   —his mother’s letter to the Congress at Aix-la-Chapelle, 343
   —continued vexations of, 354
   —illness of, 355
   —his denial of Sir Hudson Lowe’s statements, 359
   —note of, to Count Bertrand, respecting his ill-treatment, 360
   —feeling displayed on his death, 387
   —his religious notions, 393
   —his wishes as to his burial place, 394
   —advice to those around him on his death bed, _ib._
   —account of his death, 395
   —arrangements respecting his corpse, _ib._
   —funeral of, 397
   —description of his grave, 399
   —his will, 400

 Bourbons, anticipations of their overthrow, i. #232#
   —Napoleon’s intentions of restoring the, iv. 113

 Bovo, Countesse de, her amiable character, i. #201#

 Briars, narrative of Napoleon’s residence at, i. #156#
   —description of, #157#
   —wretched accommodations of the Emperor at, #158#
   —Napoleon’s mode of living at, #166#
   —the cascade at, #224#

 Brumaire, anecdotes on the 18th of, ii. #380#

 Brunswicks, degeneracy of the, ii. #376#

 Brussels, Las Cases not allowed to remain in, iv. 301

 Bulletins, accuracy of, ii. #39#

 Buonaparte, Charles, speech of, i. #66#

 —-- Jerome, character of, ii. #193#

 —-- Joseph, his amiable character, ii. #192#

 —-- Louis, particulars respecting, i. #69#

 —-- Lucien, Napoleon’s criticism on his “Charlemagne,” iii.
    #288#

 —-- Madame, her parsimony, ii. #191#

 Burroughs, Sir W., Las Cases’ conversation with, ii. #160#

 Bussy, Colonel, anecdote of, i. #84#

 Caffarelli, curious particulars of, i. #141#

 Canals, constructed by the Emperor, iii. #94#

 Cannes, Napoleon’s landing at, i. #207#

 Cape of Good Hope, passage from St. Helena to, iv. 248
   —account of the town at, 250
   —Las Cases residence at, 251

 Carnot, some account of, ii. #259#

 Cartaux, General, plans of, i. #90#
   —Deputation to, #93#

 Castlereagh, Lord, impostures of, ii. #357#
   —his blunders, iii. #251#
   —Napoleon’s refutation of his calumnies, #342#
   —letter of, relative to the treaty of Fontainebleau, iv. 132
   —Napoleon’s remarks on, 154
   —character of, 155
   —his inconsistency, 157
   —Las Cases’ letter to, 259
   —Las Cases’ letter to, iv. 347

 Catiline’s conspiracy, remarks on, ii. #23#

 Caulincourt, M. letter of, correcting the errors in a work entitled
    “Campaigne de 1814,” iv. 49

 Cerachi, his conspiracy against Napoleon, ii. #50#

 Charette, some account of, iv. 89
   —his decision of character, 90

 Charles XII., death of, i. #332#

 Chateaubriand, M. de, his writings, ii. #230#
   —his appointment to the Embassy of Rome, #231#
   —his speeches, #232#
   —Clarke, General iii, #373#

 Cherbourg, situation of, iii. #4#
   —works at, #5#
   —blunders in their construction of, #6#
   —Napoleon’s improvements at, #7#

 Chevreuse, Mad. de, cause of her banishment, ii. #219#

 China Fleet, presentation of the Captains of the, to Napoleon, i.
    #388#

 Clergy, observations of Napoleon on the, iv. 147

 Cobentzel, M. de, remarks on, iii. #371#

 Coblentz, sketch of the emigration to, iii. #61#
   —state of parties in, #63#
   —anecdotes respecting, #167#
   —amusements of the princes at, #68#
   —formation of the King’s troops at, #70#
   —delusions of the emigrants at, #93#
   —Napoleon’s observations on, #74#
   —arrival of the Duke of Brunswick at, #75#
   —reception of the emigrants in France, #78#

 Cockburn, admiral, seizes the effects of the Emperor, i. #50#
   —insult offered to Napoleon by, ii. #14#
   —accidental affront to, #75#
   —summary of his conduct, #77#

 Colombier, Madame de, her death, i. #81#.
   —Napoleon’s attachment to her, _ib._

 Colonial system, British, observations on, iii. #249#

 Cypriani, death of, iv. 363

 Commission of Government, resolutions entered into by the,
    respecting the departure of Napoleon, i. #15#

 Conscription, remarks on the, ii. #323#, iv. 145

 Constant, M., his visit to Napoleon at the Tuileries, ii. #10#

 Contractors during the Revolution, the Emperor’s treatment of, i.
    #370#

 Convention, note of Napoleon on the, ii. #281#

 Corinne of Madame de Stael, iii. #119#

 Cornwallis, Lord, character of, ii. #272#

 Corsica, Napoleon’s reservation of, i. #220#
   —his attachment to, ii. #212#
   —The Buonaparte family attacked by the peasants of, #213#

 Corvisart, medical conversation with, i. #392#

 Council of State, the, Napoleon’s remarks on, #177#
   —freedom of discussion in, #180#
   —description of, iii. #317#
   —Napoleon’s conduct in, #320#
   —Las Cases’ speech in, #323#
   —The Emperor’s speeches in, #325#

 Courage, remarks on, i. #250#

 Crescentini, anecdote of, iii. #358#

 Crime, comparison between the state of in England, and in France,
    during the dominion of Napoleon, i. #244#

 D’Antraigues, Count, some account of, iii. #376#
   —his assassination, #377#

 D’Artois, Count, measures taken by to secure Napoleon’s interest
    for the Bourbons, i. #174#

 Daru, M. anecdote of, iii. #207#

 Decrès, Napoleon’s observations on, ii. #154#

 D’Enghien, Duke, remarks of Las Cases on, iv. 188
   —Napoleon’s observations on, 190

 Desaix, comparison between Kleber, and, i. #148#
   —his reasons for signing the capitulation of Egypt, iii.
      #199#

 De Stael, Madame, particulars relative to, i. #328#
   —remarks on her Corinne, iii. #119#
   —history of Napoleon’s connexion with her, #120#
   —Napoleon’s observations on, iv. 7
   —misrepresentations respecting iv. 152

 Diplomacy, Napoleon’s commencement of, iv. 101

 Directors account of the, ii. #258#

 Directory, description of the, ii. #262#
   —Napoleon’s conduct towards the, #265#

 Divorce, on the law of, ii. #147#

 Dolgoruki, Princess, her observations on Napoleon’s court, ii.
    #217#

 Drama, remarks on the, iv. 92

 Dream, singular, of Napoleon, iii. #378#

 Dresden, battle of, iii. #233#
   —particulars relative to the capitulation of, #234#

 Dromedary, hardihood of the, i. #137#

 Drouot, General, conversation of Napoleon respecting, ii. #28#

 Dugommier, General, delay of, i. #95#

 Dumesnil, General, his bravery, i. #142#

 Dumouriez, his daring, iv. 97

 Duroc, talents of, i. #99#
   —his attachment to the Emperor, #339#
   —his death, #340#

 East India Company, account of the, iv. 75
   —Mr. Fox’s bill relative to the, 77
   —remarks of Napoleon on the, 80

 Egypt, particulars relative to the Campaign of, i. #132#
   —discontent of the French Army in, #133#
   —great privations of the French troops in, #136#
   —loss sustained by the army in, #143#
   —remarks of Napoleon on, iii. #38#
   —Desaix’s reasons for signing the capitulation of, #199#
   —Napoleon’s voyage from, #201#
   —freedom of speech in, iv. 101

 Elba, Napoleon’s stay at, i. #229#
   —his situation in, ii. #74#
   —narrative of his return from, iii. #290#

 Elysée, return of the Emperor to the, after the battle of Waterloo,
    i. #10#

 Emigrants at Coblentz, iii. #61#
   —anecdotes of, #67#
   —delusions of, #73#
   —their reception in France, #78#
   —their attack on Thionville, #180#

 Emigrants, French, in England, condition of the, i. #291#
   —delusions of, ii. #34#
   —their opinion of the Emperor, #129#
   —Napoleon’s contemplated managements as to confiscation of their
      property, #130#
   —their confidence in Mr. Pitt, #309#
   —resources of, iii. #362#

 England, Napoleon’s remarks on the invasion of, i. #375#
   —the Emperor’s observations on the situation of, ii. #226#

 Europe, plan for a history of, iii. #101#

 Fain, Baron, his “Manuscript of 1814,” iv. 115

 Fauxbourg, St. Germain, particulars relative to, i. #213#

 Ferdinand of Spain and Napoleon, ii. #293#,
   —and Charles IV. #298#

 Fesch, Cardinal, Count Bertrand’s letter to, iv. 363

 Fitzherbert, Mrs., her marriage with the Prince of Wales, ii.
    #370#

 Foissac, General Latour, Napoleon’s remarks on the cashiering of,
    ii. #99#

 Fontainebleau, the Concordat of, iii. #131#
   —particulars of the abdication at, #114#
   —occurrences on Napoleon’s departure from, #124#
   —Treaty of, #127#
   —letter of Lord Castlereagh, relative to the treaty of,
      #132#

 Fortification, remarks on, ii. #26#

 Fouché, turpitude of, i. #12#
   —intrigues of, ii. #55#
   —particulars respecting, #67#

 Fox, Mr. and Napoleon, ii. #274#
   —his bill relative to the East India Company, iv. 17
   —remarks of Napoleon on, 79

 France, amelioration of the state of, during Napoleon’s dominion,
    ii. #36#
   —The Emperor’s devotion to, #326#
   —the Regency of, iii. #102#
   —resources of, after the Campaign of Waterloo, #179#
   —the name of the Great Nation first applied to, by Napoleon, iv.
      37
   —report of the state of, under the Emperor, 60

 Frankfort, Las Cases settles at, iv. 309

 French, Napoleon’s remarks on the character of the, i. #395#
   —privileges of the, ii. #145#

 French government, contrasted with the English, i. #116#

 Gall, refutation of his doctrines, iii. #44#

 Gallo, M. de, outwitted by Napoleon, iii. #372#

 Gaming, remarks on, iv. 164

 Genlis, Madame de, her novels iv. 52

 Generals, Napoleon’s remarks on various, of his army, i.
    #337#—ii. #141#—355
   —their conduct on the Emperor’s return from Elba, iii. #300#

 George III. Las Cases’ character of, ii. #363#
   —particulars relative to his madness, #365#
   —attempts made to assassinate, #366#
   —Mr. Pitt’s influence over, #367#
   —his family, #369#

 Georges, discovery of the plot of, iv. 183

 Germany, narrative of Las Cases’ residence in, iv. 307

 Girondists, struggles between them and the Mountaineers, ii.
    #286#

 Governments, French, extracts from Napoleon’s works on, iii.
    #260#.

 Goldsmith, his libels on Napoleon, i. #319#

 Goulburn, Mr., Las Cases’ letter to, iv. 374

 Gracchi, the Emperor’s remarks on, ii. #23#

 Grassini and Napoleon, iii. #15#

 Greece, disbelief of allegedevents in the history of, i. #189#

 Grégoier, described by Napoleon, ii. #278#

 Grenadier, repartee of a, ii. #87#

 Grenoble, Napoleon’s reception at, on his return from Elba,
    #297#

 Guiche, Duchess of, employed by the Count D’Artois to interest
    Napoleon in favour of the Bourbons, i. #174#

 Guides, Corps of, origin of the, i. #246#

 Gustavus III. particulars relative to, iii. #104#

 Gustavus, IV. some account of, iii. #105#


 Hannibal, remarks of Napoleon on, iv. 141

 Hatfield, his attempts to assassinate George III., ii. #366#

 Heiresses, French falsehoods respecting Napoleon’s disposal of, ii.
    #358#

 Historians, French, Napoleon’s remarks on, i. #334#

 History, on the difficulties which it presents, iv. 179

 Holland, the King of, Bonaparte, Louis, particulars relative to,
    iii. #321#
   —The Emperor’s letter to, #325#

 Holland, public works of Napoleon in, iv. 57

 Hortense, the Princess, ridiculous reports respecting, ii.
    #190#

 Hotham, Admiral, visited by Napoleon on board the Superb, i.
    #27#

 Hughes, condemnation of, i. #98#

 Illyria, observations on, iii. #24#

 Immorality, discourse of Napoleon on, iv. 30

 Inconstancy, French, remarks on, iv. 165

 Infernal machine, account of the, i. #239#

 Institute, Napoleon at the, ii. #144#
   —The Emperor’s rebuke to a member of the, #233#

 Intrigue, imputed of Napoleon, ii. #360#

 Iron mask, the man in the, conjectures respecting, ii. #389#
   —Napoleon, alleged to be descended from, #390#

 Isle of France, affection of the inhabitants of the, for Napoleon,
    ii. #17#

 Israelites, statistical calculation respecting the, iii. #306#

 Italy, results of the campaign of, i. #131#

 Jaffa, explanation of the affair at, i. #126#

 Jena, the Emperor’s danger at, i. #336#

 Jersey, Countess of, anecdote respecting, ii. #372#
   —Las Cases’ description of, #373#

 Josephine, Empress, Napoleon’s comparison of, with Maria Louise i.
    #198#
   —observations of Napoleon on, ii. #184#
   —prodigality of, #185#
   —her submission on the occasion of her divorce, #187#
   —curious details respecting her marriage and divorce, _ib._
   —Maria Louisa’s jealousy of, #188#
   —her conjugal attachment, #189#
   —her arrival at Verona, iii. #114#
   —her extravagance, iv. 95

 Joubert, General, iii. #162#

 Jourdan, Marshal, observations of Napoleon on, iv. 13

 Junot, anecdote of, i. #99#
   —his expenditure, ii. #391#
   —reproved by the Emperor, #392#

 —-- Madame, particulars respecting, ii. #393#

 Keith, Lord, communication made to the Emperor by, respecting his
    exile to St. Helena, i. #37#
   —Las Cases’ conversation with on the situation of Napoleon,
      #94#

 Kleber and Desaix, compared, i. #148#

 La Harpe, Napoleon’s opinion of, and his writings, iii. #55#

 Lamballe, the Princess of, iii. #399#

 Lannes, Marshal, death of, ii. #395#
   —his attachment to Napoleon, _ib._

 Lanuse, General, intrepidity of, i. #144#.

 Las Cases, requests permission to follow the Emperor, i. #13#
   —his interview with his wife, _ib._
   —excitement produced by his journey to Rochefort, #18#
   —goes on board the Bellerophon to negociate the departure of
      Napoleon, #21#
   —draws up a summary of the Emperor’s situation at Rochelle
      dictated by Napoleon himself, #29#
   —letter from his wife on his arrival at Torbay, #33#
   —his feelings on hearing of the Emperor’s probable exile to St.
      Helena, #34#
   —his intimacy with the followers of the Emperor, #41#
   —the Emperor’s confidence in, #45#
   —conversation with Lord Keith respecting the Emperor, #49#
   —writes an account of the campaigns in Italy at the Emperors
      dictation, #119#
   —his reasons for not signing his adherence to the resolution of
      the senate, #187#
   —controverts Napoleon’s opinions on the character of conquerors,
      #191#
   —particulars related respecting the Fauxbourg St. Germain,
      #213#
   —his conduct while the Emperor was at Elba, #227#
   —visits London, #230#
   —his return to Paris, #231#
   —the Emperor’s kindness to, #262#
   —his facilities for studying the character of Napoleon,
      #267#
   —his sojourn in England when an emigrant, #292#
   —his new apartment described, #329#
   —his progenitors, #331#
   —illness of his son, #349#, ii. #156#
   —political self-examination of, #35#
   —his summary of the occurrences of the last nine months, from his
      quitting France, #41#
   —declaration signed by, #83#
   —his visit to Plantation House, #96#
   —conversation of with Sir W. Burroughs, #160#
   —his opinions of legal punishment, #161#
   —history of his Atlas, #164#
   —curious anecdote respecting the criticisms in his Atlas,
      #170#
   —success of his undertaking, #172#
   —strange mercantile transaction respecting, #173#
   —the Council of State described by, #317#
   —his speech on the conscription, #323#
   —his sketch of the history of the Court of London during his
      emigration, #362#
   —fall of his son from his horse, #378#
   —his summary of occurrences in April, May, and June, #398#
   —missions of, iii. #24#
   —his tour of inspection of prisons, #26#
   —his historical sketch of the emigration to Coblentz, #61#
   —consoles the Emperor, #142#
   —ingratitude towards, #145#
   —anecdotes related by, #147#, #284#, #362#
   —kindness of an English family to, ii. #160#
   —his cousin’s conduct attributed to him, #244#
   —domestic affairs of, #281#
   —his narrative of Napoleon’s return from Elba, #290#
   —his Journal, #354#
   —accuracy of the details of, #357#
   —his interview with Sir Hudson Lowe respecting the signing the
      declaration, #385#
   —his present to Napoleon, iv. 12
   —his remarks relative to the action brought against Mr. O’Meara
      by Sir Hudson Lowe, 17
   —his account of the East India Company, 75
   —his disagreement with Sir Hudson Lowe, 137
   —reflections on his situation, 138
   —his description of Lord Sidmouth, 153
   —his remarks on the affair of the Duke D’Enghien, 188
   —visited by the servant who was taken away from him, 196
   —his arrest, 201
   —confinement of, 202
   —attentions of his companions, 202
   —examination of his papers, 203
   —removal of to Balcombe’s cottage, 205
   —his letter to Sir Hudson Lowe on his imprisonment, 208
   —his protest, 209
   —his mode of restoring Napoleon’s diamond necklace, 215
   —Sir Hudson Lowe’s examination of, 217
   —anxieties of, 219
   —letter of Napoleon to, 220
   —his reflections on the Emperor’s letter, 223
   —official document relative to his removal to the Cape, 226
   —decision of the Governor respecting, 227
   —letter which accompanied it, 228
   —his correspondence with Sir Hudson Lowe, 229
   —better treatment of, 235
   —the Emperor’s message to, 236
   —takes leave of Marshal Bertrand, 238
   —his papers sealed, 240
   —declaration of Sir Hudson Lowe to, 241
   —letters of introduction given to, 242
   —sails from St. Helena, 243
   —his passage to the Cape, 244
   —statement of his grievances, 245
   —his residence at the Cape, 251
   —his letters to Lord Somerset, 254, 255, 261, 264
   —letter to Lord Castlereagh, 257
   —his letter to the Prince of Wales, 259
   —singular incident related by, 263
   —his removal to Newlands, 269
   —account of his stay there, 270
   —wines sent by, to Longwood, 273
   —his ill health, 275
   —proceeds to Tygerberg, 277
   —his request to be allowed to return to Cape Town refused, 281
   —finally receives his passports, 285
   —particulars of his passage to Europe, _ib._
   —arrival in England, 291
   —his detention in the Downs, 292
   —not allowed to remain in England, 293
   —his letter to Lord Sidmouth, 294
   —proceeds to Ostend, 297
   —his letters to the French Ministers, 299, 308
   —sent from Brussels, 301
   —kindness shewn to, at Aix-la-Chapelle, 304
   —rejoined by his wife, 306
   —narrative of his residence in Germany, 307
   —settles at Frankfort, 309
   —his letter to Maria-Louisa, 310
   —to Prince Metternich, 311
   —to the Emperor of Russia, 312
   —to Lord Bathurst, 315
   —his petition to the English Parliament, 326
   —kindness shewn to, 338
   —his plans for sending to St. Helena, _ib._
   —transactions of with the Emperor’s family, 339
   —pecuniary difficulties of, singularly alleviated, 340
   —visits Baden, 341
   —proposals made to, at Manheim, _ib._
   —his preparations for petitioning the Congress of
      Aix-la-Chapelle, 342
   —letter of, to the Empress Maria-Louisa, 343
   —to the Congress, 344
   —to the Emperor of Austria, 347
   —to Lord Castlereagh, _ib._
   —receives a packet from St. Helena, 351
   —communication of, to Lord Liverpool respecting the printing of
      his letters, 352
   —Count Bertrand’s letter to, 354
   —correspondence of, with Count Bertrand, 364, 367, 369, 371, 373
   —his letter to Mr. Goulburn, 374
   —his representations to the Congress, 375
   —constrained to quit Baden, 377
   —ridiculous reports respecting, 378
   —his letter to the Emperor Alexander at Laybach, 384
   —receives intelligence of Napoleon’s death, 386

 Larrey, Baron, the Emperor’s eulogium on, and generosity to, iv. 9

 Lavater, refutation of his system, iii. #44#

 La Vendée, Napoleon in, iv. 91

 Lawsuits, remarks on, iv. 146

 League, Napoleon’s account of the, iii. #261#

 Lefevre, Mad., her goodness of heart, ii. #181#

 Legislation, conversation of Napoleon on, iii. #349#

 Legislative body, dissolution of the, i. #183#

 Leipsic, the battle of, iii. #227#, #278#
   —loss of the French and allies at, #228#

 Leopold, Prince, and Napoleon, iv. 97, 99

 Lepaux, La Reveillere, Napoleon’s description of, ii. #258#

 Liberality, on the progress of, ii. #62#

 Line, ceremony on crossing it, #121#

 London, Las Cases’ sketch of the history of the Court of, during
    his emigration, ii. #362#

 Longwood, preparations for the Emperor’s reception at, i.
    #238#
   —description of, #263#
   —etiquette at, iii. #21#

 Louis XIV., his expenditure at Versailles, iii. #98#.

 —-- Phillipe, during his emigration, iii. #351#

 Lowe, Sir Hudson, his arrival at St. Helena, ii. #70#
   —his first interview with Napoleon, #76#
   —description of his person, #79#
   —his insinuations to Las Cases, #96#
   —his ill-natured conduct, #97#
   —his first insult and instance of cruelty, #99#
   —Napoleon’s remonstrances with, #116#,
   —ridiculous invitation sent by, #143#
   —stormy interview between him and Napoleon, #177#
   —tyrannical conduct of, ii. #227#
   —his statements respecting the expenses at Longwood, #360#
   —renewed insults of, #386#, #387#
   —conversation of Napoleon with, iii. #13#, #137#
   —Santini’s projected assassination of, #53#
   —protest addressed to, #151#
   —his cavillings, #246#
   —reduction of the Emperor’s expenditure, by, #256#
   —limits the quantity of provisions allowed to Napoleon,
      #289#
   —fresh vexations from, #309#
   —his fruitless attempts to be received by the Emperor, iii.
      #347#
   —complaints of, #355#
   —his restrictions on Napoleon’s household, and the Emperor’s
      observations on, #363#
   —declaration required by, from the followers of Napoleon,
      #380#
   —cruel insult of, #382#
   —his conversation with the individuals of Napoleon’s suite,
      #383#
   —tyrannous conduct of, iv. 3
   —new torments invented by, 14
   —Las Cases’ disagreement with, 137
   —examines Las Cases’ papers, 203
   —Las Cases’ letter to, on his imprisonment, 208
   —decision of, respecting, 227
   —Las Cases’ correspondence with, 229
   —declaration of, to Las Cases, 241
   —continued ill-treatment of, iv. 350
   —his tyrannical conduct to Mr. O’Meara, 355
   —letter of, to Count Montholon respecting the removal of Mr.
      O’Meara, 362
   —Count Montholon’s answer, _ib._

 Lutzen, the battle of, iii. #213#

 Macoy, Col., visits Napoleon, i. #354#

 Maintenon, Madame de, the Emperor’s observations on her marriage
    with Louis XIV., iii. #205#.

 Maitland, Capt., his alarm at the supposed escape of Napoleon, i.
    #25#

 Malcolm, Sir Pulteney, introduced to Napoleon, ii. #379#
   —his conversation with him, iii. #49#

 Mallet, plot of, iv. 64

 Manheim, Las Cases’ residence at, iv. 341

 Manufactures, French, Napoleon’s remarks on the state of, ii.
    #209#

 Manuscript of St. Helena, iv. 279

 Manuscrit de l’Ile d’Elbe, extracts from, iii. #260#

 Marbois, M. de, ludicrous hoax on, ii. #113#

 Marie Antoinette, Madame Campan’s account of, iii. #397#

 Maria Louisa, Empress, her marriage to Napoleon, i. #199#
   —accouchement of, ii. #21#
   —reported joke of, #114#
   —her jealousy of Josephine, #188#
   —particulars relative to her marriage, iii. #274#
   —Las Cases’ letters to, iv. 310

 Massena, General, i. #189#

 Medicine, Napoleon’s opinion of, i. #391#, iii. #146#

 Megrigny, Madame de, and Napoleon, iii. #93#.

 Memoirs of Napoleon, by one who was constantly near him during
    fifteen years, i. #151#

 Mendicity, establishment for, in France, iii. #22#

 Ménéval, M., Secretary to Napoleon, iii. #332#
   —his assiduity, #333#

 Metternich, Prince, letter of Las Cases to, iv. 311

 Ministers, British, perfidy of, ii. #272#
   —Napoleon’s opinion of, #273#

 —-- Napoleon’s review of his, iv. 162

 Monges, character of, ii. #278#

 Montebello, Duchesse de, appointed Lady of Honour to Maria Louisa,
    i. #200#

 Montesquiou, Mad. de, educates the King of Rome, i. #203#

 Montesson, Madame de, applies for the title of Duchess of Orleans,
    iv. 33.

 Montholon, Count, his letter to Sir Hudson Lowe, iii. #151#

 Montholon, Madame de, her return to Europe, iv. 382

 Montveran, M., his account of the Campaign of Saxony, iii.
    #213#

 Moreau, conspiracy of, Georges, and Pichegru, ii. #221#
   —his trial, #225#
   —different tactics of Napoleon and, #357#
   —discovery of the plot of, iv. 183

 Moscow, the conflagration of, iii. #164#, #172#,
   —consequences of the, #165#
   —the approach to, #167#
   —description of, #168#
   —its public buildings, #169#
   —cause of the re-burning of, #171#
   —conduct of the inhabitants of, #173#.

 Murat, death of, i. #351#
   —particulars respecting, _ib._
   —Napoleon’s clemency to, #352#
   —letter from Napoleon to, on the affairs of Spain, ii. #302#
   —his treachery, #396#
   —his character drawn by Napoleon, #397#.

 Nantes, Anecdotes of the Bishop of, iii. #128#.

 Narbonne, Count de, Maria Louisa’s dislike of, i. #202#
   —attachment of the Emperor to, ii, #89#.

 National Debt, English, remarks of Napoleon on the, iii. #252#
   —means of reducing the, #253#.

 Nations, plans for the concentration of different, iv. 104
   —the Emperor’s reasons for not divulging these plans, 108.

 Navy, Napoleon’s plans for improving the, iv. 83.

 Newlands, removal of Las Cases to, iv. 269
   —account of his stay there, 270.

 Ney, Napoleon’s remarks on the memorial in justification of, i.
    #257#
   —comparison between the fates of Turenne and, #259#
   —Napoleon’s reflections on the death of, ii. #15#
   —reconciliation of the Emperor with, iii. #299#.

 Nintz, Napoleon’s sentimental journey to, iii. #88#

 Nobility, Napoleon’s objects in creating, iv. 178.

 Northumberland, the conduct of the crew of, to Napoleon, i.
    #52#
   —description of the Emperor’s cabin on board, #53#
   —departure of, ii. #334#.

 Offenbach, Las Cases’ residence at, iv. 380

 O’Meara, Dr., the Emperor’s explanation with, ii. #128#
   —Las Cases’ remarks respecting the action brought against, by Sir
      Hudson Lowe, iv. 17
   —extracts from his work, #246#
   —Sir Hudson Lowe’s tyrannic treatment of, iv. 355
   —the Governor’s letter to Count Montholon respecting the removal
      of, 362

 Paris, Napoleon’s improvements at, iii. #97#
   —his entry into, on his return from Elba, #301#

 Parisians, habits of the, ii. #246#

 Parliament, Las Cases’ Petition to, iv. 326

 Patience, German, curious instance of, ii. #276#.

 Paul, Emperor, character of, iii. #109#
   —letters of, #116#

 Physiognomy, observations of Napoleon on, ii. #210#,
    #389#

 Pichegru, account of, i. #74#
   —his opinion of Napoleon, #76#
   —betrayal of, ii. #222#
   —trial of, #225#
   —discovery of the plot of, #183#.

 Piedmont, power of the king of, iii. #93#.

 Piontkowski, some account of, i. #364#
   —caricature on his arrival at St. Helena, #365#
   —arrested by Sir Hudson Lowe, iii. #360#

 Pitt, Mr., his influence, ii. #364#
   —his imputed tyranny, #367#
   —remarks of Napoleon on, iv. 79

 Plantation House, account of, i. #304#

 Plymouth, curiosity excited at, by the arrival of Napoleon at, i.
    #36#

 Poets, French, Napoleon’s opinion of, i. #368#

 Politeness, importance of, ii. #167#

 Politics, French, the Emperor’s views of, i. #360#

 Political economy, Napoleon’s ideas of, and plans on, ii.
    #350#, iv. 81

 Polygamy, observations on, iii. #318#

 Polytechnic school, suppressions of, iii. #124#

 Pope, situation of the, at Fontainebleau, i. #253#

 —--, power of the, iii. #129#

 Portalis, disgrace of, i. #181#

 Pradt, Abbé de, his analysis of the character of Napoleon, i.
    #269#
   —defends the Emperor against the animadversions of the Allied
      Sovereigns, #271#
   —describes the Emperor’s Court at Dresden, ii. #103#

 Prague, the Congress of, iii. #216#
   —negociations at, #225#

 Predestination, Napoleon’s ideas of, iii. #347#

 Prefects, their power, iv. 85
   —liberality of Napoleon to, 87

 Press, liberty of the, under Napoleon, i. #280#
   —conversation on the, ii. #291#

 Prince of the Peace; the, and Napoleon, ii. #298#

 Princes, Napoleon’s remarks on the education of, i. #204#

 Prisoners, proposed exchange of French and English, iv. 40
   —treatment of, in France, 45
   —anecdotes of English, 70

 Prisons, French state of, iii. #31#
   —the Emperor’s observations on, #34#

 Protestantism and Popery, iii. #128#

 Provisional Government, the, presented to the Emperor, i. #13#

 Prussia, the Queen of, anecdote of Napoleon and the, i. #276#
   —interview between her and Napoleon at Tilsit, ii. #308#

 ———— the king of, differences between him and Napoleon, ii.
    #311#
   —his awkwardness, _ib._

 Rats, annoyances from, at St. Helena, ii. #357#

 Reade, Colonel, visits Napoleon, iii. #353#

 Recamier Madame, particulars relative to, iv. 151

 Religion, conversation of Napoleon on, ii. #253#, iii.
    #125#

 Rewbel, described by Napoleon, ii. #258#

 Revolution, Napoleon’s notes on Robespierre and the other leaders
    of the, ii. #288#
   —observations of the Emperor on the, iii. #242#
   —effects of the, #266#

 Revolutions, discourse of Napoleon on, iii. #241#

 Robespierre, character of, i. #221#

 —-- the younger, i. #100#

 Rochefoucault, M. de-la,Napoleon’s account of, iv. 166

 Rome, the King of, his education, i. #203#
   —particulars of his birth, ii. #21#, iii. #274#

 Ross, Captain, his agreeable manners, i. #120#

 Russia, discourse on the war with, ii. #104#, iv. 109
   —conversation of Napoleon regarding, iii. #162#
   —the Emperor’s views and intentions with respect to the war with,
      iv. 19
   —physical advantages of, 73

 —-- the Emperor of, Napoleon’s remarks on, i. #400#
   —conversation respecting the war with, ii. #104#
   —plans of, #107#
   —his attachment to Napoleon, #312#
   —Las Cases’ letter to, #312#

 St. Denis, expiatory altars at, i. #224#

 —-- Domingo, the expedition to, ii. #279#

 Santini projects the assassination of Sir Hudson Lowe, iii.
    #53#

 —-- adventures of, iv. 389

 Savary, reply of, to an agent of the king’s, ii. #314#
   —conversation of Napoleon in the bills of, iii. #310#

 St. Helena, the Emperor protests against his removal to, i.
    #37#
   —arrival of Napoleon at, #154#
   —ball given by the Admiral at, #226#
   —Government of, #309##
   —the Emperor’s remarks on, #346#
   —scanty resources of, #347#
   —unhealthy climate of, ii. #40#
   —arrival of the Foreign Commissioners at, #315#
   —shooting party at, iii. #122#
   —departure of Las Cases from, iv. 243

 St. Jean D’Acre, particulars relative to the siege of, i.
    #140#

 St. Pierre, Bernardin, his writings, i. #332#

 Saxony, the campaigns of, observations of Napoleon on the, iii.
    #209#
   —M. Montveran’s account of, #213#
   —negociations during, #219#
   —fatalities and perfidies which caused the failure of Napoleon
      in, #229#
   —summary of, #275#

 Schönbrunn, the fanatic of, ii. #51#

 Schools, military, Napoleon’s plan of education in, ii. #243#

 Secretaries of state, opinion of, iii. #314#

 Sensibility, remarks on, iii. :316

 Serrurier, Napoleon’s opinion of, i. #189#

 Sidmouth, Lord, account of, iv. 153
   —Las Cases letter to, 294

 Sieyes, his opinion of Napoleon, i. #172#
   —avarice and knavery of, ii. #382#
   —anecdotes of, iii. #390#
   —character of, #391#

 Smith, Sir Sydney, remarks on, iii. #200#

 Somerset, Lord, Las Cases letters to, iv. 254, 255, 261, 264
   —character of, 268

 Soult, injustice done to, ii. #29#
   —anecdote of Napoleon and the wife of, #143#

 Spain, Napoleon’s remarks on the war in, ii. #134#, #292#
   —errors committed during the war in, #296#

 Spaniards, character of ii. #136#

 Stuart, Mrs., Napoleon’s conversation with, i. #197#

 Suffren, M. de, account of, iv. 82

 Supplement to the Memoirs of Las Cases’, iv. 393

 Talleyrand, Napoleon’s comments on, ii. #64#, iii. #118#

 Tartuffe, opinion of, iii. #144#

 Tascher, Mlle. de, her marriage, i. #202#

 Thionville, attack of the Emigrants on, iii. #80#

 Throne, Imperial, establishment of the, iii. #269#

 Tilsit, transactions during the conferences at, ii. #307#

 Torbay, arrival of the Emperor at, i. #32#

 Toulon, surrendered to the English, i. #86#

 Tourneur, de la Manche, Napoleon’s account of, ii. #261#

 Tours, the Archbishop of, iii. #136#

 Toussaint L’Ouverture, some account of, ii. #280#

 Trade-winds, explained, i. #110#

 Tribunate, Napoleon’s reasons for dismissing the, i. #185#

 Tristan de Montholon, instructed by Napoleon, ii. #388#

 Tuileries, attack on the, iii. #90#
   —allusions to Napoleon’s court at, #257#

 Tygerberg, account of Las Cases residence at, iv. 278

 Valency, situation of the Spanish Princes at, i. #252#

 Versailles, observations on the Court of, iii. #59#

 Veterans, Napoleon’s intentions respecting the employment of, ii.
    #245#

 Voltaire, criticism on his Mahomet, ii. #94#

 Wales, the Prince of, his marriage with Mrs. Fitzherbert, ii.
    #370#
   —his excesses, #371#
   —fascinating manners of, #373#
   —his treatment of the Princess, _ib._
   —Las Cases’ letter to, iv. 259

 —-- Princess Charlotte of, opinion of the English respecting, iv.
    98
   —her high spirit, 99

 War, the art of, remarks of Napoleon on, iv. 143

 Ware, Col. visits Las Cases, iv. 271

 Waterloo, the battle of, Napoleon accounts for his losing it, i.
    #249#, iv. 161
   —measures that might have been adopted by Napoleon after, ii.
      #52#
   —the Emperor’s hesitation as to the course to be pursued after,
      #56#
   —his recollections of, #333#
   —his narrative of, iii. #179#
   —resources of France after, #179#
   —the motives which regulated Napoleon’s conduct after, #181#

 Wellington, Lord, Napoleon’s remarks on, iv. 160

 Whitworth, Lord, reported conversation between him and Napoleon,
    ii. #270#

 Wilks, Governor, his interview with Napoleon at St. Helena, i.
    #325#
   —takes leave of the Emperor, ii. #84#

 Wilson, Sir Robt., erroneous statements of, i. #123#

 Wine, bad, furnished to Napoleon, iii. #257#
   —allowance of, to the Emperor’s household, #289#

 Women, Napoleon’s jokes upon, ii. #239#
   —repugnance of, to let their age be known, iii. #258#

 Wurmser, campaign against, iii. #114#

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               Footnotes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         Transcriber’s Note

Errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been corrected,
and are noted here. The references are to the page and line in the
original. The issues tabulated below should be noted, along with the
resolutions.

Variants of proper names have been replaced with the most commonly
accepted version, in order to facilitate text searches.

The formatting and punctuation in the Index, which covers all four
volumes, has been normalized where necessary to follow the intended
styles.

There were a number of instances in the text where quoted material
was missing either an opening or closing quotation mark. The proper
placement is not always obvious, but the most plausible choice has
been made in each case.

One instance occurs on p. 247, when Las Cases is paraphrasing a
passage from Barry O’Meara’s book _Napolean in Exile_: the passage
beginning ‘only wanted to make’ is as suitable a place as any to
re-assume the quotation and make sense of the closing quotation mark
several lines later.

The references in the table below are to the page and line in the
original printed text. Entries for the index will have an indicator
of the column as the second digit.

  10.8     delivered up defenceless to the barbarians.[”] Added.

  34.38    he had just em[lp/pl]oyed;                     Transposed.

  44.10    [“]When, at length, they determined to treat   Added.

  49.16    that would inev[eti/it]ably have been imposed  Replaced.

  49.22    Inserted in that Jo[u]rnal                     Added.

  51.8     yet the pro[gid/dig]ies of his return          Transposed.

  54.11    Vimereux, Amblet[ue/eu]se, and Etaples         Transposed.

  58.27    But the object which particular[l]y engrossed  Added.

  58.40    and Decr[e/è]s, the minister, indefatigably    Replaced.
           prosecuted

  67.42    they would have given me every proof of it[.]” Added.

  68.37    better and better pleased with your book.[”]   Added.

  73.9     answering any inq[iu/ui]ries he might make     Transposed.

  74.35    (this he pronounced very emphaticall[l]y)      Removed.

  81.1     the Minister Decr[é/è]s, on the subject here   Replaced.
           alluded to.

  92.10    a whim on the pa[s/r]t of the conqueror?       Replaced.

  94.38    Then, after a few moments[’] silence           Added.

  105.38   but Frederick the Great.[”]                    Added.

  112.40   saying, [“]I go to oppose the enemy,           Added.

  113.20   the deg[ar/ra]ding conditions which were       Transposed.
           transmitted

  121.6    upon Paris[, /. “]Here I wanted firmness,”     Replaced.
           said he;

  122.9    “Yes,” said the Emperor, [“]and those orders   Added.

  122.21   It is certain that at Fontain[e]bleau          Added.

  125.36   The victories of Cham[p]-Aubert, Montmirail,   Added.

  126.23   he would never allow it[ it] to be said        Removed.

  130.36   from delica[c]y to the Emperor Alexander.      Added.

  136.1    that he had int[ne/en]ded to make choice       Transposed.

  136.21   one of his Ministers (the Duke Decr[é/è]s)     Replaced.

  141.15   the most su[r]prising character                Added.

  143.34   that it should be sup[p]ressed                 Added.

  148.22   [“]But,” it was asked,                         Added.

  148.41   Historie critique et raisonn[e/é]e</span>      Replaced.

  157.4    of the monstrous in[s/c]onsistency of a        Replaced.
           Minister

  164.29   and a man of considerable fortune.[”]          Added.

  169.26   [“]At the same period,                         Removed.

  180.30   [“]I have seen the plan of my own battle       Added.

  193.15   the Duke d’Engh[ei/ie]n, who might now be      Transposed.
           convicted

  208.8    I therefor[s/e] wrote to the Governor          Replaced.

  212.10   You have spok[o/e]n to me, Sir                 Replaced.

  214.11   to converse with me re[s]pecting the letters   Added.

  215.42   ready for you some time[;] it was written      Restored.

  221.22   the first article of his in[s]tructions        Added.

  221.35   those persons who are in[s]trusted with the    Removed.
           keeping

  230.7    [“]You are too advantageously situated         Added.

  241.14   to permit me [s/t]o seal them with my arms     Replaced.

  242.22   [“]DEC. 31, 1816.”                             Added.

  246.27   describes the Emperor to have said[,]          Added.

  247.5    that Sir Hudson Lowe said[,]                   Added.

  247.8    [“]only wanted to make an instrument of him    Added.

  251.20   [vieing] with each other                       _sic_

  262.38   he was acting in[ in] conformity with orders   Redundant.

  263.38   the reproach of having addr[e]ssed no          Added.
           complaint

  265.11   to depend entirely on my own resour[s/c]es.    Replaced.

  268.6    I had been so exce[e]dingly unwell             Added.

  272.6    visited in our solitude [h/b] numerous         Replaced.
           officers

  285.9    Thus I was  absolut[le/el]y a prisoner         Transposed.

  286.13   Our b[i/e]rth was small, dirty, and            Replaced.
           inconvenient

  306.29   it was found nec[c]essary to allow me          Removed.

  327.9    if they never had been tran[s]gressed.         Added.

  328.29   and not to cho[o]se for him                    Added.

  329.40   to be thus compromised[./?]                    Replaced.

  330.1    and by removing or with[h]olding               Added.

  332.23   of the feelings of the illustr[i]ous victim?   Added.

  337.29   of your laws to foreign solicitations.[’]      Added.

  347.31   without incurring my anger—--[”]               Added.

  348.36   also the pe[e/c]uliar circumstances            Replaced.

  352.41   and pronounce[d] in the last instance          Added.

  368.20   on board the _Bel[l]erophon>_                  Added.

  370.30   is inspired with the [c/s]ame sentiments       Replaced.

  371.5    [“]I have at last received                     Removed.

  371.14   [“]My health is still as indifferent           Removed.T

  394.5    [“]You are a physician,” replied he laughing,  Added.

  394.19   near the limpid stream of this pure water.[”]  Added.

  409.28   in order to dis[c]harge my legacies.           Added.

  413.1.45 Army, the French, conspiracy in,[ in] Egypt,   Removed.
           i. 133

  414.2.33 his wretched accommo[c/d]ation there           Replaced.

  414.2.51 his ideas on the armies of the An[s]cients     Removed.

  414.2.53 politic[e/a]l schemes of,                      Replaced.

  414.2.54 contrasts th[a/e] characters of his            Replaced.

  419.1.32 Chateaubr[an/iand], M. de, his writings,       Replaced.

  421.1.54 Holland, public works of Napo[f/l]eon in       Replaced.

  424.2.64 —continued ill-treatment of, i[i/v]. 350       Wrong
                                                          volume.

  425.2.15 Protestan[t]ism and Popery                     Added.

Any external links referred to in these notes, or in the other
volumes in this work referred to in the Index, cannot be assumed to
be functional. They are working at the time of this project’s
posting in January, 2017.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE, EXILE, AND CONVERSATIONS OF THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON. (VOL. IV) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

